63 (3) Son’s Flesh

At Sāvatthı̄.
“Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of nutriment for the maintenance of beings that have already come to be and for the assistance of those about to come to be.
What four?
The nutriment edible food, gross or subtle; second, contact; third, mental volition; fourth, consciousness.
These are the four kinds of nutriment for the maintenance of beings that have already come to be and for the assistance of those about to come to be.

“And how, bhikkhus, should the nutriment edible food be seen?
Suppose a couple, husband and wife, had taken limited provisions and were travelling through a desert.
They have with them their only son, dear and beloved.
Then, in the middle of the desert, their limited provisions would be used up and exhausted, while the rest of the desert remains to be crossed.
The husband and wife would think: ‘Our limited provisions have been used up and exhausted, while the rest of this desert remains to be crossed.
Let us kill our only son, dear and beloved, and prepare dried and spiced meat.  By eating our son’s flesh we can cross the rest of this desert.  Let not all three of us perish!’
“Then, bhikkhus, the husband and wife would kill their only son, dear and beloved, prepare dried and spiced meat, and by eating their son’s flesh they would cross the rest of the desert.
While they are eating their son’s flesh, they would beat their breasts and cry: ‘Where are you, our only son?  Where are you, our only son?’

“If, bhikkhus, there is no lust for the nutriment consciousness, if there is no delight, if there is no craving, consciousness does not become established there and come to growth.
Where consciousness does not become established and come to growth, there is no descent of name-and-form.
Where there is no descent of name-and-form, there is no growth of volitional formations.
Where there is no growth of volitional formations, there is no production of future renewed existence.
Where there is no production of future renewed existence, there is no future birth, aging, and death.
Where there is no future birth, aging, and death, I say that is without sorrow, anguish, and despair.

Fourth (64)
