The Great Discourse on Origination

Thus have i heard.
Once the Lord was staying among the Kurus. There is a market town there called Kammāsadhamma.

And the Venerable Ananda came to the Lord, saluted him, sat down to one side, and said:
‘It is wonderful, Lord, it is marvellous
how profound this dependent origination is, and how profound it appears!
And yet it appears to me as clear as clear!’
‘Do not say that, Ananda, do not say that!
This dependent origination is profound and appears profound.
It is through not understanding, not penetrating this doctrine that this generation has become like a tangled ball of string, covered as with a blight, tangled like coarse grass, unable to pass beyond states of woe, the ill destiny, ruin and the round of birth-and-death.

‘If, Ananda, you are asked: “Has ageing-and-death a condition for its existence?”
you should answer: “Yes.”
If asked: “What conditions ageing-and-death?”
you should answer: “Ageing-and-death is conditioned by birth.”

‘If, Ananda, you are asked: “Has birth a condition for its existence?”
you should answer: “Yes.”
If asked: “What conditions birth?”
you should answer: “Becoming conditions birth.”

‘If, Ananda, you are asked: “Has becoming a condition for its existence?”
you should answer: “Yes.”
If asked: “What conditions becoming?”
you should answer: “Clinging conditions becoming.”

‘If, Ananda, you are asked: “Has clinging a condition for its existence?”
you should answer: “Yes.”
If asked: “What conditions clinging?”
you should answer: “Craving conditions clinging.”

‘If, Ananda, you are asked: “Has craving a condition for its existence?”
you should answer: “Yes.”
If asked: “What conditions craving?”
you should answer: “Feeling conditions craving.”

‘If, Ananda, you are asked: “Has feeling a condition for its existence?”
you should answer: “Yes.”
If asked: “What conditions feeling?”
you should answer: “Contact conditions feeling.”

‘If, Ananda, you are asked: “Has contact a condition for its existence?”
you should answer: “Yes.”
If asked: “What conditions contact?”
you should answer: “Name-and-form conditions contact.”

‘If, Ananda, you are asked: “Has name-and-form a condition for its existence?”
you should answer: “Yes.”
If asked: “What conditions name-and-form?”
you should answer: “Consciousness conditions name-and-form.”

If asked: “Has consciousness a condition for its existence?”
you should answer: “Yes.”
If asked: “What conditions consciousness?”
you should answer: “Name-and-form conditions consciousness.”

‘Thus, Ānanda, name-and-form conditions consciousness and consciousness conditions name-and-form, name-and-form conditions contact, contact conditions feeling, feeling conditions craving, craving conditions clinging, clinging conditions becoming, becoming conditions birth, birth conditions ageing-and-death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and distress.
Thus this whole mass of suffering comes into existence.

“Birth conditions ageing-and-death”, so it was said, and this is the way that should be understood.
If, Ananda, there were no birth at all, anywhere, of anybody or anything:
of devas to the deva-state,
of gandhabbas to the gandhabbas-state,
of yakkhas to the yakkhas-state,
of ghosts to the ghosts-state,
of humans to the humans-state,
of quadrupeds to the quadrupeds-state,
of birds to the birds-state,
of reptiles to the reptile state,
if there were absolutely no birth at all of all these beings,
then, with the absence of all birth, the cessation of birth, could ageing-and-death appear?’
‘No, Lord.’
‘Therefore, Ananda, just this is the root, the cause, the origin, the condition for ageing-and-death; namely birth.

“Becoming conditions birth”, so it was said, and this is the way that should be understood.
Suppose there were totally and utterly no becoming for anyone anywhere.
That is, in the World of Sense-Desires, of Form or the Formless World;
- in the absence of all becoming, with the cessation of becoming, could birth appear?’
‘No, Lord.’
‘Therefore, Ananda, just this is the root, the cause, the origin, the condition of birth; namely becoming.

‘Clinging conditions becoming”, so it was said, and this is the way that should be understood.
Suppose there were totally and utterly no clinging for anyone anywhere.
That is, sensuous clinging, clinging to views, to rite-and-ritual, to personality-belief;
- in the absence of all clinging, with the cessation of clinging, could becoming appear?
‘No, Lord.’
‘Therefore, Ananda, just this is the root, the cause, the origin, the condition of becoming; namely clinging.

‘Craving conditions clinging”, so it was said, and this is the way that should be understood.
Suppose there were totally and utterly no craving for anyone anywhere.
That is, for sights, sounds, smells, tastes, tangibles, name-objects;
- in the absence of all craving, with the cessation of craving, could clinging appear?
‘No, Lord.’
‘Therefore just this is the condition of clinging; namely craving.

‘Feeling conditions craving.”, so it was said, and this is the way that should be understood.
Suppose there were totally and utterly no feeling for anyone anywhere. 
That is, feeling born of eye-contact, ear-contact, nose-contact, tongue-contact, body-contact, name-contact;
When there’s no feeling at all, with the cessation of feeling, could craving appear?’
‘No, Lord.’
‘Therefore, Ananda, just this is the root, the cause, the origin, the condition for craving; namely feeling.

‘And so, Ananda, feeling conditions craving,
craving conditions seeking,
seeking conditions acquisition,
acquisition conditions decision-making,
decision-making conditions lustful desire,
lustful desire conditions attachment,
attachment conditions appropriation,
appropriation conditions avarice,
avarice conditions guarding of possessions,
and because of the guarding of possessions there arise the taking up of stick and sword, quarrels, disputes, arguments, strife, abuse, lying and other evil unskilled states.

“Because of the guarding of possessions there arise the taking up of stick and sword, quarrels, disputes, arguments, strife, abuse, lying and other evil unskilled states.”, so it was said, and this is the way that should be understood.
Suppose there were totally and utterly no guarding of possessions for anyone anywhere.
When there’s no guarding of possessions at all, with the cessation guarding of possessions, could the taking up of stick and sword, quarrels, disputes, arguments, strife, abuse, lying and other evil unskilled states appear?’
‘No, Lord.’
‘Therefore, Ananda, just this is the root, the cause, the origin, the condition for the taking up of stick and sword, quarrels, disputes, arguments, strife, abuse, lying and other evil unskilled states; namely guarding of possessions.

“Avarice conditions the guarding of possessions”, so it was said, and this is the way that should be understood.
Suppose there were totally and utterly no avarice for anyone anywhere.
When there’s no avarice at all, with the cessation avarice, could the guarding of possessions appear?’
‘No, Lord.’
‘Therefore, Ananda, just this is the root, the cause, the origin, the condition for all guarding of possessions; namely avarice.

‘Appropriation conditions avarice’, so it was said, and this is the way that should be understood.
Suppose there were totally and utterly no appropriation for anyone anywhere..
When there’s no appropriation at all, with the cessation appropriation, could avarice appear?’
‘No, Lord.’
‘Therefore, Ananda, just this is the root, the cause, the origin, the condition for all avarice; namely appropriation.

‘Attachment conditions appropriation’, so it was said, and this is the way that should be understood.
Suppose there were totally and utterly no attachment for anyone anywhere.
When there’s no attachment at all, with the cessation attachment, could appropriation appear?’
‘No, Lord.’
‘Therefore, Ananda, just this is the root, the cause, the origin, the condition for all appropriation; namely attachment.

‘Lustful desire conditions attachment’, so it was said, and this is the way that should be understood.
Suppose there were totally and utterly no lustful desire for anyone anywhere.
When there’s no lustful desire at all, with the cessation lustful desire, could attachment appear?’
‘No, Lord.’
‘Therefore, Ananda, just this is the root, the cause, the origin, the condition for all attachment; namely lustful desire.

‘Decision-making conditions lustful desire’, so it was said, and this is the way that should be understood.
Suppose there were totally and utterly no decision-making for anyone anywhere.
When there’s no decision-making at all, with the cessation decision-making, could lustful desire appear?’
‘No, Lord.’
‘Therefore, Ananda, just this is the root, the cause, the origin, the condition for all lustful desire; namely decision-making.

‘Acquisition conditions decision-making’, so it was said, and this is the way that should be understood.
Suppose there were totally and utterly no acquisition for anyone anywhere.
When there’s no acquisition at all, with the cessation acquisition, could decision-making appear?’
‘No, Lord.’
‘Therefore, Ananda, just this is the root, the cause, the origin, the condition for all decision-making; namely acquisition.

‘Seeking conditions acquisition’, so it was said, and this is the way that should be understood.
Suppose there were totally and utterly no seeking for anyone anywhere.
When there’s no seeking at all, with the cessation seeking, could acquisition appear?’
‘No, Lord.’
‘Therefore, Ananda, just this is the root, the cause, the origin, the condition for all acquisition; namely seeking.

“Craving conditions seeking.”, so it was said, and this is the way that should be understood.
Suppose there were totally and utterly no craving for anyone anywhere.
When there’s no craving at all, with the cessation craving, could there be any seeking?’
‘No, Lord.’
‘Therefore, Ananda, just this is the root, the cause, the origin, the condition for all seeking; namely craving.
Thus these two things become united in one by feeling.

“Contact conditions feeling.”, so it was said, and this is the way that should be understood.
Suppose there were totally and utterly no contact for anyone anywhere.
That is, eye-contact, ear-contact, nose-contact, tongue-contact, body-contact, mind-contact.
When there’s no contact at all, with the cessation contact, could there be any feeling?’
‘No, Lord.’
Therefore just this is the root, the cause, the origin, the condition for feeling; namely contact.

“Name-and-form conditions contact”, so it was said, and this is the way that should be understood.
By whatever properties, features, signs or indications the name-group is conceived of,
in the absence of such properties, features, signs or indications would there be manifest any designation contact in the idea of the form-group?’
‘No, Lord.’

By whatever properties, features, signs or indications the form-group is conceived of,
in the absence of such properties, features, signs or indications would there be any grasping at sensory reaction on the part of the name-group?’
‘No, Lord.’

‘By whatever properties, features, signs or indications the name-group and the form-group are conceived of,
in the absence of such properties, features, signs or indications would there be manifest any designation contact, or at sensory reaction?’
‘No, Lord.’

‘By whatever properties, features, signs or indications the name-group is conceived of,
in the absence of such properties, features, signs or indications is there any contact to be found?’
‘No, Lord.’
‘Then, Ananda, just this, namely name-and-form, is the root, the cause, the origin, the condition for all contact.

“Consciousness conditions name-and-form”, so it was said, and this is the way that should be understood.
If consciousness were not to come into the mother’s womb, would name-and-form develop there?’
‘No, Lord.’
‘Or if consciousness, having entered the mother’s womb, were to be deflected, would name-and-form come to birth in this life?’
‘No, Lord.’
‘And if the consciousness of such a tender young being, boy or girl, were thus cut off, would name-and-form grow, develop and mature?’
‘No, Lord.’
‘Therefore, Ananda, just this, namely consciousness, is the root, the cause, the origin, the condition of name-and-form.

“Name-and-form conditions consciousness”, so it was said, and this is the way that should be understood.
If consciousness did not find a resting-place in name-and-form, would there subsequently be an arising and coming-to-be of birth, ageing, death and suffering?’
‘No, Lord.’
‘Therefore, Ananda, just this, namely name-and-form, is the root, the cause, the origin, the condition of consciousness.
Thus far then, Ananda, we can trace birth and decay, death and falling into other states and being reborn,
This is how far the scope of language, terminology, and description extends;
thus far is the sphere of understanding,
thus far the round goes as far as can be discerned in this life, namely to name-and-form together with consciousness.

‘In what ways, Ananda, do people explain the nature of the self?
Some declare the self to be material and limited, saying:
“My self is material and limited”;
some declare it to be material and unlimited, saying:
“My self is material and unlimited”;
some declare it to be immaterial and limited, saying:
“My self is immaterial and limited”;
some declare it to be immaterial and unlimited, saying:
“My self is immaterial and unlimited.”

‘Whoever declares the self to be material and limited,
They considers it to be material and limited now,
or they considers it to be material and limited in the next world,
thinking: “Though it is not so now, I shall acquire it there.”
This being so, it’s appropriate to say that a view of self as material and limited underlies them.

‘Whoever declares the self to be material and unlimited,
They considers it to be material and unlimited now,
or they considers it to be material and unlimited in the next world,
thinking: “Though it is not so now, I shall acquire it there.”
This being so, it’s appropriate to say that a view of self as material and unlimited underlies them.

‘Whoever declares the self to be immaterial and limited,
They considers it to be immaterial and limited now,
or they considers it to be immaterial and limited in the next world,
thinking: “Though it is not so now, I shall acquire it there.”
This being so, it’s appropriate to say that a view of self as immaterial and limited underlies them.

‘Whoever declares the self to be immaterial and unlimited,
They considers it to be immaterial and unlimited now,
or they considers it to be immaterial and unlimited in the next world,
thinking: “Though it is not so now, I shall acquire it there.”
This being so, it’s appropriate to say that a view of self as immaterial and unlimited underlies them.
So much, Ananda, for those who proffer an explanation of the self.

‘How is it with those who do not explain the nature of the self?
Some do not declare the self to be material and limited, saying:
“My self is material and limited”;
some do not declare it to be material and unlimited, saying:
“My self is material and unlimited”;
some do not declare it to be immaterial and limited, saying:
“My self is immaterial and limited”;
some do not declare it to be immaterial and unlimited, saying:
“My self is immaterial and unlimited.”

‘Whoever does not declare the self to be material and limited,
They do not consider it to be material and limited now,
or they do not consider it to be material and limited in the next world,
they do not think: “Though it is not so now, I shall acquire it there.”
This being so, it’s appropriate to say that a view of self as material and limited does not underly them.

‘Whoever does not declare the self to be material and unlimited,
They do not consider it to be material and unlimited now,
or they do not consider it to be material and unlimited in the next world,
they do not think: “Though it is not so now, I shall acquire it there.”
This being so, it’s appropriate to say that a view of self as material and unlimited does not underly them.

‘Whoever does not declare the self to be immaterial and limited,
They do not consider it to be immaterial and limited now,
or they do not consider it to be immaterial and limited in the next world,
they do not think: “Though it is not so now, I shall acquire it there.”
This being so, it’s appropriate to say that a view of self as immaterial and limited does not underly them.

‘Whoever does not declare the self to be immaterial and unlimited,
They do not consider it to be immaterial and unlimited now,
or they considers it to be immaterial and unlimited in the next world,
they do not think: “Though it is not so now, I shall acquire it there.”
This being so, it’s appropriate to say that a view of self as immaterial and unlimited does not underly them.
So much, Ananda, for those who do not proffer an explanation of the self.

‘In what ways, Ananda, do people regard the self?
They equate the self with feeling:
“Feeling is my self”,
or: ”Feeling is not my self, my self is impercipient”,
or: “Feeling is not my self, but my self is not impercipient, it is of a nature to feel.”

‘Now, Ananda, one who says:
“Feeling is my self” should be told:
“There are three kinds of feeling, friend:
pleasant, painful, and neutral.
Which of the three do you consider to be your self?”
When a pleasant feeling is felt, no painful or neutral feeling is felt, but only pleasant feeling.
When a painful feeling is felt, no pleasant or neutral feeling is felt, but only painful feeling.
And when a neutral feeling is felt, no pleasant or painful feeling is felt, but only neutral feeling.

‘Pleasant feeling is impermanent, conditioned, dependently-arisen, bound to decay, to vanish, to fade away, to cease.
Painful feeling is impermanent, conditioned, dependently-arisen, bound to decay, to vanish, to fade away, to cease.
Neutral feeling is impermanent, conditioned, dependently-arisen, bound to decay, to vanish, to fade away, to cease.
So anyone who, on experiencing a pleasant feeling, thinks: “This is my self”,
must, at the cessation of that pleasant feeling, think: “My self has gone!”
So anyone who, on experiencing a painful feeling, thinks: “This is my self”,
must, at the cessation of that painful feeling, think: “My self has gone!”
So anyone who, on experiencing a neutral feeling, thinks: “This is my self”,
must, at the cessation of that neutral feeling, think: “My self has gone!”
Thus whoever thinks: “Feeling is my self” is contemplating something in this present life that is impermanent, a mixture of happiness and unhappiness, subject to arising and passing away.
Therefore it is not fitting to maintain: “Feeling is my self.”

‘But anyone who says:
“Feeling is not my self, my self is impercipient” should be asked:
“If, friend, no feelings at all were to be experienced, would there be the thought: ‘I am’?”
“No, Lord.”
Therefore it is not fitting to maintain:
“Feeling is not my self, my self is impercipient.”

‘And anyone who says:
“Feeling is not my self, but my self is not impercipient, my self is of a nature to feel” should be asked:
“Well, friend, if all feelings absolutely and totally ceased without remainder,
When there’s no feeling at all, with the cessation of feeling, would the thought: ‘I am this?”
“No, Lord.”
Therefore it is not fitting to maintain:
“Feeling is not my self, but my self is not impercipient, my self is of a nature to feel.”

‘From the time, Ananda, when a monk no longer regards feeling as the self,
or the self as being impercipient,
or as being percipient and of a nature to feel,
by not so regarding, he clings to nothing in the world;
not clinging, he is not excited by anything,
and not being excited he gains personal liberation,
and he knows: “Birth is finished, the holy life has been led, done was what had to be done, there is nothing more here.”
‘And if anyone were to say to a monk whose mind was thus freed:
“The Tathāgata exists after death”, that would be [seen by him as] a wrong opinion and unfitting”
“The Tathāgata does not exist after death”, that would be [seen by him as] a wrong opinion and unfitting”
“The Tathāgata both exists and does not exist after death”, that would be [seen by him as] a wrong opinion and unfitting”
“The Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death.”, that would be [seen by him as] a wrong opinion and unfitting”
Why so?
As far, Ananda, as designation and the range of designation reaches,
as far as language and the range of language reaches,
as far as concepts and the range of concepts reaches,
as far as understanding and the range of understanding reaches,
as far as the cycle reaches and revolves —
that monk is liberated from all that by super-knowledge, and to maintain that such a liberated monk does not know and see would be a wrong view and incorrect.

‘Ānanda, there are seven stations of consciousness and two realms.
Which are the seven?
There are beings different in body and different in perception, such as human beings, some devas and some in states of woe.
That is the first station of consciousness.
There are beings different in body and alike in perception, such as the devas of Brahmā’s retinue, born there [on account of having attained] the first jhāna.
That is the second station of consciousness.
There are beings alike in body and different in perception, such as the Abhassara devas.
That is the third station of consciousness.
There are beings alike in body and alike in perception, such as the Subhakinna devas.
That is the fourth station of consciousness.
There are beings who have completely transcended all perception of matter, by the vanishing of the perception of sense-reactions and by non-attention to the perception of variety; thinking: “Space is infinite”, they have attained to the Sphere of Infinite Space.
That is the fifth station of consciousness.
There are beings who, by transcending the Sphere of Infinite Space, thinking: “Consciousness is infinite”, have attained to the Sphere of Infinite Consciousness.
That is the sixth station of consciousness.
There are beings who, having transcended the Sphere of Infinite Consciousness, thinking: “There is no thing”, have attained to the Sphere of No-Thingness.
That is the seventh station of consciousness.
[The two realms are:] The Realm of Unconscious Beings and, secondly, the Realm of Neither-Perception-Nor-Non-Perception.

‘Now, Ananda, as regards this first station of consciousness, with difference of body and difference of perception, as in the case of human beings, some devas and some in states of woe,
if anyone were to understand it, its origin, its cessation, its attraction and its peril, and the deliverance from it, would it be fitting for him to take pleasure in it?’
‘No, Lord.’

‘Now, Ananda, as regards this second station of consciousness, with difference body and alike in perception, such as the devas of Brahmā’s retinue, born there [on account of having attained] the first jhāna,
if anyone were to understand it, its origin, its cessation, its attraction and its peril, and the deliverance from it, would it be fitting for him to take pleasure in it?’
‘No, Lord.’

‘Now, Ananda, as regards this third station of consciousness, with alike in body and difference of perception, such as the Abhassara devas,
if anyone were to understand it, its origin, its cessation, its attraction and its peril, and the deliverance from it, would it be fitting for him to take pleasure in it?’
‘No, Lord.’

‘Now, Ananda, as regards this fourth station of consciousness, with alike in body and alike in perception, such as the Subhakinna devas,
if anyone were to understand it, its origin, its cessation, its attraction and its peril, and the deliverance from it, would it be fitting for him to take pleasure in it?’
‘No, Lord.’

‘Now, Ananda, as regards this fifth station of consciousness, who have completely transcended all perception of matter, by the vanishing of the perception of sense-reactions and by non-attention to the perception of variety; thinking: “Space is infinite”, they have attained to the Sphere of Infinite Space.
if anyone were to understand it, its origin, its cessation, its attraction and its peril, and the deliverance from it, would it be fitting for him to take pleasure in it?’
‘No, Lord.’

‘Now, Ananda, as regards this sixth station of consciousness, who, by transcending the Sphere of Infinite Space, thinking: “Consciousness is infinite”, have attained to the Sphere of Infinite Consciousness.
if anyone were to understand it, its origin, its cessation, its attraction and its peril, and the deliverance from it, would it be fitting for him to take pleasure in it?’
‘No, Lord.’

‘Now, Ananda, as regards this seventh station of consciousness, who, having transcended the Sphere of Infinite Consciousness, thinking: “There is no thing”, have attained to the Sphere of No-Thingness.
if anyone were to understand it, its origin, its cessation, its attraction and its peril, and the deliverance from it, would it be fitting for him to take pleasure in it?’
‘No, Lord.’

‘Now, Ananda, as regards the the realm of unconscious beings,
if anyone were to understand it, its origin, its cessation, its attraction and its peril, and the deliverance from it, would it be fitting for him to take pleasure in it?’
‘No, Lord.’

‘Now, Ananda, as regards the realm of neither-perception-nor-non-perception,
if anyone were to understand it, its origin, its cessation, its attraction and its peril, and the deliverance from it, would it be fitting for him to take pleasure in it?’
‘No, Lord.’

‘Ananda, insofar as a monk, having known as they really are these seven stations of consciousness and these two spheres, their origin and cessation, their attraction and peril, is freed without attachment, that monk, Ananda, is called one who is liberated by wisdom.

‘There are, Ananda, these eight liberations.
What eight?
‘Possessing form, one sees forms.
That is the first liberation.
Not perceiving material forms in oneself, one sees them outside.
That is the second liberation.
Thinking: “It is beautiful”, one becomes intent on it.
That is the third liberation.
By completely transcending all perception of matter, by the vanishing of the perception of sense-reactions and by non-attention to the perception of variety, thinking: “Space is infinite”, one enters and abides in the Sphere of Infinite Space.
That is the fourth liberation.
By transcending the Sphere of Infinite Space, thinking: “Consciousness is infinite”, one enters and abides in the Sphere of Infinite Consciousness.
That is the fifth liberation.
By transcending the Sphere of Infinite Consciousness, thinking: “There is no thing”, one enters and abides in the Sphere of No-Thingness.
That is the sixth liberation.
By transcending the Sphere of No-Thingness, one reaches and abides in the Sphere of Neither-Perception-Nor-Non-Perception.
That is the seventh liberation.
By transcending the Sphere of Neither-Perception-Nor-Non-Perception one enters and abides in the Cessation of Perception and Feeling.
That is the eighth liberation.
These, Ananda, are the eight liberations.

‘Ananda, when once a monk attains these eight liberations in forward order,
in reverse order,
and in forward-and-reverse order,
entering them and emerging from them as and when, and for as long as he wishes,
and has gained by his own super-knowledge here and now both the destruction of the corruptions and the uncorrupted liberation of heart and liberation by wisdom, that monk is called “both-waysliberatedʺ,
and, Ananda, there is no other way of ʺboth-ways-liberationʺ that is more excellent or perfect than this.’
 
Thus the Lord spoke.
And the Venerable Ananda rejoiced and was delighted at his words.


