Sensual Pleasures


When a mortal desires sensual pleasure,
if that succeeds for him,
surely he is elated in mind,
having gained what he desires.

But when, full of sensual desire,
a person is aroused by desire,
if those sensual pleasures decline,
he is afflicted as if pierced by a dart.

One who avoids sensual pleasures
like a serpent’s head with the foot,
being mindful, overcomes
this attachment to the world.

Fields, land, or bullion,
cattle and horses, slaves and servants,
women, relatives — when a person greedily
longs for various sensual pleasures,

even the weak overpower him;
obstacles crush him.
Then suffering enters him
as water does a broken boat.

Therefore, ever mindful, a person
should avoid sensual pleasures.
Having abandoned them, one can cross the flood,
as by bailing out the boat one can reach the far shore.



The Octad on the Cave


Stuck in the cave, densely covered over,
dwelling immersed in bewilderment,
a person such as this is far from seclusion,
for in the world sensual pleasures are not easily abandoned.

Based upon desire, bound to enjoyment of existence,
they let go with difficulty, for there is no release through others.
Concerned, too, with the future or the past,
they hanker for these sensual pleasures or earlier ones.

Those greedy for sensual pleasures, intent on them,
are confused, stingy, settled in the unrighteous.
When they come upon suffering they lament:
“What will we be after we pass away here?”

Therefore a person should train right here:
whatever in the world one might know as unrighteous,
one should not on its account act unrighteously,
for the wise say this life is short.

I see in the world this population trembling all over,
addicted to craving for states of existence;
inferior people prattle in the mouth of death,
not devoid of craving for various states of existence.

See them trembling over things taken as “mine”
like fish in a depleted stream with little water.
Having seen this too, one should take nothing as “mine,”
not forming attachment to states of existence.

Having removed desire for both ends,
having fully understood contact, without greed,
not doing anything for which one might blame oneself,
the wise person is not tainted by things seen or heard.

Having fully understood perception, one can cross the flood.
The muni, untainted by possessions,
with the dart extracted, living heedfully,
does not desire this world or another.



The Octad on the Hostile


Some speak with hostile minds,
while some speak with minds bent on truth.
The muni does not become involved in an arisen dispute;
therefore the muni has no barrenness anywhere.

How could one transcend one’s own view
if, drawn by desire, one is entrenched in a preference?
Taking one’s own [view] to be perfect,
one would speak as one understands.

When a person, without being asked, proclaims
to others his own good behavior and observances,
the skilled say he is one of ignoble nature,
since on his own accord he proclaims himself.

But when a peaceful bhikkhu, one inwardly quenched,
does not boast of his good behavior by saying, “I am thus,”
the skilled say he is one of noble nature
who has no swellings anywhere in the world.

One who has formulated impure teachings,
put them together and advanced them,
becomes attached to the benefit he sees for himself,
to that peace dependent on the unstable.

Attachments to views are not easily overcome;
having decided among teachings, one tightly grasps [a view].
Therefore, among those bases of attachment,
a person rejects and takes up a teaching.

One who is cleansed formulates no view
anywhere in the world about various states of existence.
Having abandoned hypocrisy and conceit, through what
would the cleansed one go [astray]194 when he is uninvolved?

One involved is embroiled in disputes about teachings;
but how, about what, could one dispute with one uninvolved?
Nothing is taken up or rejected by him;
he has shaken off all views right here.



The Octad on the Pure


“I see the pure, the supreme health;
a person achieves full purity through what is seen.”
Directly knowing thus, having known “[It is] supreme,”
“I contemplate the pure,” one falls back on knowledge.

If a person gains purity by the seen,
or if one abandons suffering by knowledge,
then one with acquisitions is purified by another;
the view proclaims him as one who asserts thus.

A brahmin does not speak of purity by another,
by the seen and the heard, by good behavior and observances, by the sensed.
Untainted by merit and by evil, he has discarded
what was taken up without creating anything here.

Having abandoned the former, attached to another,
carried along by impulse, they do not cross the tie.
They grab hold and let go, like a monkey
grasping and letting go of a branch.

Having undertaken observances by himself,
a person goes up and down, attached to perception.
But having realized the Dhamma with knowledge,
the wise one, broad in wisdom, does not go up and down.

One who is remote from all phenomena,
from whatever is seen, heard, or sensed —
how could anyone here in the world categorize him,
that seer behaving openly?

They do not construct, they have no preferences,
they do not assert: “[This is] ultimate purity.”
Having loosened the knot of grasping that had been tied,
they do not form desires for anything in the world.

For a brahmin who has transcended the boundary,
who has known and seen, nothing is tightly grasped.
Not excited by lust or attached to dispassion,
he does not grasp anything here as supreme.



The Octad on the Supreme


Settling [on his own] as supreme among views,
whatever a person esteems as best in the world,
[in comparison] he says all others are “inferior”:
therefore he has not transcended disputes.

Whatever benefit one sees for oneself
in the seen, the heard, the sensed, or in good behavior and observances,
having grasped hold of that alone,
one regards all else as inferior.

The skilled speak of that as a knot
when one is attached and regards others as inferior.
Therefore a bhikkhu should not be attached to the seen,
to the heard or sensed, or to good behavior and observances.

Nor should one construct any view in the world
by means of knowledge or good behavior and observances.
One should not take oneself as “equal”
or think of oneself as “inferior” or “superior.”

Having abandoned what is taken up, not clinging,
one does not create a dependency even on knowledge.
Not taking sides among those who are divided,
one does not fall back on any view at all.

For one who has no wish here for either end,
for various states of existence here or beyond,
there are no places of residence at all
grasped after deciding among teachings.

Not even a subtle notion is formulated by him
about what is seen, heard, or sensed here.
How could anyone here in the world categorize him,
that brahmin who does not cling to any view?

They do not construct, they have no preferences;
even the teachings are not embraced by them.
A brahmin cannot be led by good behavior and observances;
the impartial one, gone beyond, does not fall back.



Old Age


Short, alas, is this life;
one even dies before a hundred years.
Even if one lives longer,
one still dies because of old age.

People sorrow over things taken as “mine,”
for there are no permanent possessions.
Having seen that there is separation,
one should not live the home life.

Whatever a person conceives thus, “This is mine,”
that too is abandoned at death.
Having understood this, a wise one, my follower,
should not incline to take things as “mine.”

Just as, on awakening, a person does not see
whatever was encountered in a dream,
so too one does not see a beloved person
who has died and passed away.

Although those people were seen and heard,
and were known by such and such a name,
when a person has passed away,
the name alone remains to be uttered.

Those who are greedy for personal assets
do not escape sorrow, lamentation, and miserliness.
Therefore the munis, seers of security,
wandered having abandoned possessions.

When a bhikkhu lives withdrawn,
resorting to a secluded seat,
they say it is appropriate for him
not to show himself in a fixed dwelling.

The muni is not dependent on anything;
he takes nothing as pleasing, nothing as displeasing.
Lamentation and miserliness do not stick to him
as water does not stick to a leaf.

Just as a water drop does not stick to a lotus leaf,
or water to the lotus flower,
so the muni does not cling to anything
among the seen, heard, or sensed.

One cleansed does not thereby conceive
things seen, heard, or sensed.
He does not wish for purification by another,
for he becomes neither passionate nor dispassionate.



Tissa Metteyya


“For one who indulges in sexual intercourse,”
(said the Venerable Tissa Metteyya),
“tell me, dear sir, of the distress.
Having heard your teaching,
we will train in seclusion.”

“When one indulges in sexual intercourse,
(Metteyya,” the Blessed One said),
“even the teaching itself is forgotten,
and he practices wrongly:
this is ignoble in him.

“One who previously lived alone
but then resorts to sexual intercourse
is like a vehicle that has gone astray:
in the world they call him a low worldling.

“Whatever fame and acclaim he previously enjoyed,
these fall away from him.
Having seen this, one should train
to abandon sexual intercourse.

“Oppressed by his thoughts,
he broods like a poor wretch.
Having heard the reprimand of others,
one such as this is humiliated.

“Then he prepares weapons [of defense]
when reproached by the words of others.
This is a great thicket for him,
that he sinks into false speech.

“He was known as a wise man
when resolved on living alone,
but when he engaged in sexual intercourse,
like a dullard he is afflicted.

“Having known this danger
here in the before and after,
a muni should resolutely live alone;
he should not resort to sexual intercourse.

“One should train just in seclusion;
this is supreme among the noble ones.
One should not conceive oneself best because of this:
then one is indeed close to nibbāna.

“When the muni lives void,
indifferent to sensual pleasures,
people tied to sensual pleasures envy him
as one who has crossed the flood.”



Pasūra


“‘Here alone is purity,’ they declare;
they say there is no purification in other teachings.
Declaring whatever they depend on to be excellent,
many are entrenched in separate truths.

“Desiring debate, having plunged into the assembly,
in pairs they accuse one another of being a fool.
Those of different convictions assert their argument,
desiring praise, claiming to be skilled.

“Keen on speaking in the midst of the assembly,
wishing for praise, he becomes anxious.
If his assertion is rejected, he feels humiliated.
Upset by blame, he seeks a flaw [in his opponent].

“If they say his assertion is defective,
and the judges consider it rejected,
the loser laments and sorrows,
he moans: ‘He surpassed me.’

“These disputes have arisen among ascetics;
in relation to them, one becomes elated and dejected.
Having seen this, too, one should desist from arguments,
for there is no other benefit than praise and gain.

“If, however, he is praised there,
having declared his doctrine in the midst of the assembly,
he is thrilled by this and swells with pride,
having obtained the benefit that accords with his wish.

“Though his pride is the ground of distress,
he yet speaks from conceit and arrogance.
Having seen this, too, one should not dispute;
for the skilled say this does not bring purity.

“Just as a hero, nourished on the king’s food,
comes thundering, desiring an opponent,
rush off in his direction, Sūra
already in the past, there was no scope for a fight.

“When they grasp a view and argue,
and assert, ‘This alone is true,’
tell them: ‘When a debate has arisen
there is no opponent for you here.’

“But among those who live remote,
who do not oppose a view with other views,
what will you obtain, Pasūra, from those
who grasp nothing here as supreme?

“But now you have come brooding,
devising speculative views in your mind.
You have confronted one who is cleansed:
indeed, you won’t be able to succeed.”



Māgandiya


“Having seen Taṇhā, Aratī, and Ragā,
I did not have any desire for sexual intercourse,
so why [should I desire] this, full of urine and feces?
I would not wish to touch her even with my foot.”

“If you do not wish a gem such as this,
a woman desired by many rulers of men,
what kind of view, behavior, observances, lifestyle,
existence, and rebirth do you assert?”

“Having decided among teachings,
(Māgandiya,” said the Blessed One),
“it does not occur to one, ‘I assert this,’ [about a view] tightly grasped.
But seeing into views, not grasping any of them,
investigating, I saw the peace within.”

“Indeed, muni, you speak without grasping
(said Māgandiya)
those judgments that have been formulated,”
“As to that matter called ‘the peace within,’
how is it proclaimed by the wise?”

“Not by view, nor by learning, nor by knowledge,
(Māgandiya,” said the Blessed One),
“nor do I speak of purity through good behavior and observances;
but neither without view, without learning, without knowledge,
without good behavior, without observances — not in that way.
But having relinquished these, not grasping any of them,
peaceful, not dependent, one should not hanker for existence.”

“If indeed it is not by view, by learning, nor by knowledge,”
(said Māgandiya),
“nor by good behavior and observances, that one speaks of purity;
nor without view, without learning, without knowledge,
without good behavior and observances — not in that way,
I think this is an utterly confused teaching;
some fall back on purity by means of view.”

“Asking repeatedly while dependent on a view,
(Māgandiya,” said the Blessed One),
“you have become baffled over things tightly grasped.
But from this you have not gained even an inkling;
hence you consider it utterly confused.

“One who thinks himself equal, superior, or inferior
might engage in disputes because of this.
Not shaking among these three discriminations,
he does not think ‘equal, superior.’

“Why would that brahmin assert, ‘It’s true,’
or with whom would he dispute, ‘It’s false’?
When for him there is no ‘equal’ and ‘unequal,’
with whom would he engage in debate?

“Having left home to roam without abode,
in the village the muni is intimate with none.
Void of sensual pleasures, without preferences,
he would not engage in contentious talk with people.

“When he wanders detached from things in the world,
the nāga would not grasp and assert them.
As a thorny-stalked lotus, born in the water,
is untainted by water and mud,
just so the muni, a proponent of peace, free of greed,
is untainted by sensual pleasures and the world.

“Because of a view or an opinion a Veda-master does not become conceited,
for he does not identify with them.
Not led by kamma or by what is heard,
he is not drawn to any abodes.

“For one detached from perception there are no knots;
for one liberated by wisdom there are no delusions.
But those who have grasped perceptions and views
wander in the world creating friction.”



Before the Breakup


“How does he see, how does he behave,
the one who is said to be ‘peaceful’?
When asked by me, O Gotama,
describe the supreme person.”

“Devoid of craving before the breakup,”
(said the Blessed One), “not dependent on the past,
not to be reckoned in the middle,
for him there are no preferences.

“He is without anger, unafraid,
not boastful, not regretful,
of speaking with reflection, not restless:
he is truly a muni controlled in speech.

“He is without attachment to the future;
he does not sorrow over the past.
As a seer of seclusion in the midst of contacts,
he is not led astray among views.

“Withdrawn, not a schemer,
without longing, not miserly,
courteous, not [morally] repulsive,
not intent on slander.

“Not swept up by enjoyments,
and not swollen with arrogance;
gentle, gifted with ingenuity,
not credulous, not growing dispassionate.

“He does not train from a desire for gain,
nor is he irritated over lack of gain.
Not hostile, because of craving
he does not hanker after tastes.

“Equanimous, ever mindful,
in the world he does not conceive himself
to be equal, or superior, or inferior:
for him there are no swellings.

“He has no dependencies —
having known the Dhamma, he is independent.
No craving is found in him
for existence or nonexistence.

“I call him ‘peaceful’
who is indifferent to sensual pleasures.
In him no knots are found;
he has crossed over attachment.

“He has no sons or cattle,
nor does he possess fields or land.
In him there is nothing to be found
as either taken up or rejected.

“That by which they might speak of him —
worldlings as well as ascetics and brahmins —
is not esteemed by him;
therefore he is not stirred up by words.

“Devoid of greed, without miserliness,
the muni does not speak [of himself]
as among superiors, or equals, or inferiors.
Not given to mental construction, he does not enter upon mental constructs.

“One who takes nothing in the world as his own,
and who does not sorrow over what is absent,
who does not enter upon things:
he is truly said to be ‘peaceful.’ ”



Quarrels and Disputes


“From where do quarrels and disputes arise,
lamentation, sorrow, and miserliness?
From where do conceit and arrogance arise
along with slander? Please tell me this.”

“Quarrels and disputes arise from what is pleasing,
as do lamentation, sorrow, and miserliness,
conceit and arrogance along with slander.
Quarrels and disputes are connected with miserliness,
and slanders occur when disputes arise.”200

“From what do pleasing things in the world originate,
and those states of greed that spread through the world?
From what do longing and fulfillment originate,
which a person has about the future?”

“Pleasing things in the world originate from desire,
as do those states of greed that spread through the world.
From this originate the longing and fulfillment
that a person has about the future.”

“From what in the world does desire originate?
And from what do judgments too arise,
and anger, false speech, and perplexity,
and those [other] things the Ascetic has mentioned?”

“Desire originates based on what they say
is ‘pleasant’ or ‘unpleasant’ in the world.
Having seen the vanishing and coming-to-be of forms,
a person forms a judgment in the world.

“Anger, false speech, and perplexity:
these things, too, arise when that dyad exists.
One perplexed should train on the path of knowledge;
having known, the Ascetic stated these things.”

“From what do the pleasant and unpleasant originate?
When what does not exist do these not come to be?
As to this matter of vanishing and coming-to-be,
tell me from what it originates.”

“The pleasant and unpleasant originate from contact;
when contact does not exist, these do not come to be.
As to this matter of vanishing and coming-to-be,
I tell you that it originates from this.”

“From what in the world does contact originate?
From what do possessions too arise?
When what does not exist is there no taking as ‘mine’?
When what has vanished do contacts not touch one?”

“Contacts are dependent upon name and form;
possessions are based on desire.
When desire does not exist, there is no taking as ‘mine.’
When form has vanished, contacts do not touch one.”

“How must one attain for form to vanish?
How do pleasure and pain also vanish?
Please tell me this, how they vanish.
We would like to know that — such is my thought.”

“Not percipient through perception, not percipient through disturbed perception,
not altogether without perception, not percipient of what has vanished:
form vanishes for one who has so attained,
for concepts due to proliferation are based on perception.”

“You explained to us whatever we asked you.
Let us now ask something else: please tell me this.
Do some wise men here say that at this point
this is the foremost purity of the spirit,
or do they speak of it as different from this?”203

“Some wise men here say that at this point
this is the foremost purity of the spirit.
But204 some among them, claiming to be skilled,
speak of an attainment without residue remaining.

“Having known these to be ‘dependent,’
and having known the dependencies, the muni, the investigator,
having known, liberated, does not enter disputes;
the wise one does not come upon various states of existence.”



The Smaller Discourse on Deployment


“Settled each in his own view,
contending, the skilled make diverse assertions:
‘One who knows this has understood the Dhamma;
rejecting this, one is not consummate.’

“Having contended thus, they dispute
and say: ‘The opponent is a fool, unskilled.’
Which assertion among these is truthful,
for they all claim to be skilled?”

“If one who does not affirm the opponent’s doctrine
is thereby a fool, a brute, deficient in wisdom,
all indeed are fools, utterly deficient in wisdom:
for all these are settled in their views.

“But if by their own view they are cleansed,
pure in wisdom, skilled, intelligent,
there is none among them defective in wisdom,
for their views are similarly taken up.

“I do not say, ‘This is correct,’
as the fools in pairs say to one another.
They all take their own view to be true;
therefore they consider the opponent a fool.”

“That which some say is ‘true, correct,’
others say is ‘hollow, false.’
Having contended thus, they dispute.
Why don’t ascetics speak in unison?”

“Truth, indeed, is one — there is no second;
a person who understands this would not dispute.
These proclaim their own diverse truths;
therefore ascetics do not speak in unison.”

“But why do they assert diverse truths,
those proponents who claim to be skilled?
Are those truths actually many and diverse,
or do they follow a line of reasoning?”

“Truths surely are not many and diverse,
except by [mistakenly] perceiving permanent things in the world.
But having formulated reasoning about views,
they assert the dyad ‘true’ and ‘false.’

“The seen, heard, good behavior and observances,
the sensed — dependent on these, he shows disdain.
Based on a judgment, derisive,
he says: ‘The opponent is a fool, unskilled.’

“As he considers the opponent a fool,
on the same ground he describes himself as ‘skilled.’
Of his own accord, claiming himself skilled,
he disdains the other, yet speaks in the same way.

“Inflated by that extremist view,
intoxicated with conceit, thinking himself perfect,
on his own accord he has mentally anointed himself,
for that view of his is taken up in such a manner.

“If one is deficient because of the opponent’s word,
the opponent himself is similarly deficient in wisdom.
But if he is himself a master of knowledge, a wise man,
then there is no fool among ascetics.

“Those who assert a teaching different from this
have failed to reach purity and perfection:
thus the sectarians speak in separate ways,
for they are attached to their own views.

“‘Here only is purity’ they assert;
they say there is no purification in other teachings.
Thus, too, the sectarians, separately entrenched,
firmly assert their own way there.

“Asserting firmly his own way,
what opponent here could one consider a fool?
He himself would just provoke strife
by calling his opponent a fool of impure character.

“Based on a judgment, taking himself as the measure,
he enters upon further disputes in the world.
Having abandoned all judgments,
a person does not create strife in the world.”



The Greater Discourse on Deployment


“Those who are settled in views,
who dispute, saying, ‘This alone is truth’:
do all of them receive only blame,
or do some there also win praise?”

“This [praise] is slight, not sufficient for peace;
I say there are two fruits of disputes.
Having seen this too, one should not dispute,
seeing as security the stage of non-dispute.

“Whatever commonplace opinions there are,
a wise person does not get involved in them.
Why would one uninvolved become involved
when he does not acquiesce in what is seen and heard?

“Those who take good behavior as supreme
speak of purity through self-control.  Having taken up an observance, they settle on it,
thinking: ‘Let’s train right here, then there would be purity.’
Claiming to be skilled, they are led back into existence.

“If he has fallen away from good behavior and observances,
he trembles because he has failed in his action.
He longs and yearns for purity here,
like one on a journey who has lost his caravan.

“But having abandoned all good behavior and observances,
and these deeds, blameworthy and blameless,
not yearning for either purity or impurity,
one should live detached, not grasping peace.

“Dependent on austerity or scrupulousness,
or on what is seen, heard, or sensed,
running onward, they declare purity,
not rid of craving for various states of existence.

“For one who yearns there are longings
and trembling too over things mentally formulated;
but for one here who has no passing away or rebirth,
why would he tremble and for what would he long?”

“The teaching that some here say is supreme,
others say that the same is inferior.
Which assertion of theirs could be true
when they all claim to be skilled?”

“They say their own teaching is complete,
but they say the other’s teaching is inferior.
Having quarreled thus, they go on disputing,
as they each say their own opinion is true.

“If one is inferior when disparaged by an opponent,
no one would be distinguished among teachings.
For they each say the other’s teaching is inferior,
while firmly advocating their own.

“And their veneration of their own teaching,
is done just as they praise their own ways.
All their assertions would be truthful,
since for them purity is exclusively their own.

“For a brahmin there is no being led by others,
no selecting among teachings and grasping tightly.
Therefore he has overcome disputes,
since he does not regard another teaching as supreme.

“Saying, ‘I know, I see, it is just like this,’
some here fall back on purity through a view.
If one has seen, what good is this to himself?
Having gone too far, they assert purity by another.

“Seeing, a person will see name-and-form;
having seen, it is just these that he will know.
Granted, let him see much or little,
the skillful say purity is not won in that way.

“A dogmatist is not easily disciplined,
one preferring a formulated view.
Claiming that the good is found in what he depends on,
as a proponent of purity, he saw things that way there.

“Having comprehended, a brahmin does not take up mental constructs;
he is not a pursuer of views nor a kinsman of knowledge.
Having known the commonplace opinions,
he maintains equanimity while others grasp.

“Having loosened the knots here in the world,
the muni does not take sides in arisen disputes.
He is peaceful among the restless, equanimous,
without grasping while others grasp.

“Having abandoned past influxes, not creating new ones,
he does not go along with desire, nor is he a dogmatist.
Released from speculative views, the wise person,
free of self-reproach, is not tainted by the world.

“He is remote from all phenomena,
from whatever is seen, heard, or sensed.
With his burden dropped, released, the muni,
not given to mental construction, does not desist, does not yearn” 
so said the Blessed One.


Quickly


“I ask you, Kinsman of the Sun, great rishi,
about seclusion and the state of peace.
How having seen does a bhikkhu attain nibbāna,
not clinging to anything in the world?”

“By reflection, he should stop [the conceit] ‘I am,’
[the Blessed One said].
the entire root of concepts due to proliferation,”
“Whatever cravings there may be internally,
he should always train mindfully for their removal.

“Whatever one might know,
whether internally or externally,
one should not be obstinate on that account,
for that is not called quenching by the good.

“Because of this one should not think oneself better,
nor should one consider oneself inferior or equal.
Being affected in various ways,
one should not persist in positioning oneself.

“It is internally that he should achieve peace;
a bhikkhu should not seek peace through another.
For one who is at peace within himself,
there is nothing taken up, much less rejected.

“Just as in the middle of the ocean
no wave arises, but the ocean remains steady,
so too he should be steady, without impulse;
a bhikkhu should not cause a swelling anywhere.”

“The one with opened eyes declared
the Dhamma he witnessed, the removal of obstacles.
Speak about the practice, venerable one,
the Pātimokkha and also concentration.”

“One should not be restless with the eyes,
one should block the ears against village gossip.
One should not be greedy for tastes,
and one should not take anything in the world as ‘mine.’

“When he is touched by a contact,
a bhikkhu should not lament anywhere.
He should not long for any state of existence,
nor should he tremble amid fearful conditions.

“Having obtained food and drink,
things to eat or clothes to wear,
he should not hoard them,
nor be agitated if he does not obtain them.

“He should be a meditator, not one with restless feet;
he should refrain from regret; he should not be heedless.
A bhikkhu should dwell amid seats and beds
[in lodgings] where there is little noise.

“He should not overindulge in sleep;
he should be devoted to wakefulness, ardent.
He should abandon indolence, hypocrisy, laughing, and playfulness,
sexual intercourse, and personal ornamentation.

“He should not employ Atharva spells,
or interpret dreams, signs, or constellations.
My follower would not decipher animal cries,
or practice healing or making women fertile.

“A bhikkhu should not be shaken by blame,
nor should he be elated when praised.
He should dispel greed and miserliness,
as well as anger and slanderous speech.

“A bhikkhu should not engage in buying and selling;
he should not do anything that incurs criticism.
He should not form intimacy in the village;
he should not address people from a desire for gain.

“A bhikkhu should not be boastful,
and he should not utter insinuating speech.
He should not train himself in impudence;
he should not utter contentious talk.

“He should not be led into false speech,
nor should he deliberately do anything deceptive.
Because of his way of life, his wisdom,
or his good behavior and observances, he should not despise another.

“When provoked, having heard many words
from ascetics who speak profusely,
he should not respond to them harshly,
for the good do not retaliate.

“Having understood this Dhamma, investigating,
a bhikkhu should always train mindfully.
Having known quenching as peace,
he should not be heedless in Gotama’s teaching.

“For he is a conqueror who is himself unconquered;
he saw the Dhamma as a witness, not by hearsay.
Therefore, heedful in that Blessed One’s teaching,
always honoring it, one should train in accordance with it.”



One Who has Taken up the Rod


“Fear has arisen from one who has taken up the rod:
see the people engaged in strife.
I will tell you of my sense of urgency,
how I was stirred by a sense of urgency.

“Having seen the population trembling
like fish in a pool with little water,
having seen them hostile to one another,
fear came upon me.

“The world was insubstantial all around;
all the directions were in turmoil.
Desiring an abode for myself,
I did not see [any place] unoccupied.

“Having seen those hostile at the end,
discontent came upon me.
Then I saw the dart here,
hard to see, nestled in the heart.

“When one is struck by that dart
one runs astray in all directions.
But having drawn out that dart,
one does not run, does not sink.”

There the trainings are recited:
“Whatever bonds there are in the world,
one should not be intent on them.
Having entirely pierced through sensual pleasures,
one should train for one’s own nibbāna.

“One should be truthful, not impudent,
without hypocrisy, devoid of divisive speech.
Without anger, a muni should cross over
the evil of greed and miserliness.

“One should vanquish sleepiness, torpor, and dullness;
one should not keep company with heedlessness.
A person whose mind is set on nibbāna
should not persist in arrogance.

“One should not be led into false speech;
one should not engender affection for form.
One should fully understand conceit,
and one should refrain from rashness.

“One should not delight in the old;
one should not form a liking for the new.
One should not sorrow over what is diminishing;
one should not be attached to an attraction.

“I call greed the great flood,
I call longing the rapids,
the basis, compulsion,
the swamp of sensuality hard to overcome.

“Not deviating from truth, a muni,
a brahmin, stands on high ground.
Having relinquished all,
he is indeed called peaceful.

“One who truly is a knower, a Veda-master,
having known the Dhamma, is independent.
Living rightly in the world,
he does not long for anything here.

“One here who has crossed over sensual pleasures,
the tie so hard to overcome in the world,
who has cut off the stream, without bonds,
does not sorrow, does not hope.

“Dry up what pertains to the past;
let there be nothing afterward.
If you do not grasp in the middle,
you will live in peace.

“One who does not claim as ‘mine’
anything at all here in name-and-form,
who does not sorrow over what is nonexistent,
truly does not lose out in the world.

“One for whom nothing is taken
as ‘this is mine’ or ‘[this belongs] to others,’
not finding anything to be taken as ‘mine,’
does not sorrow, thinking: ‘It is not mine.’

“Not bitter, not greedy,
without impulse, everywhere the same —
when asked about one who is unshakable,
I call that the benefit.

“For one without impulse, who understands,
there is no activation at all.
Abstaining from instigation,
he sees security everywhere.

“The muni does not speak of himself
as among equals, inferiors, or superiors.
Peaceful, without miserliness,
he does not take, does not reject” —
so said the Blessed One.


Sāriputta 


“I have never before seen,”
(said the Venerable Sāriputta),
“nor have I ever heard it from anyone —
a teacher of such lovely speech,
leader of a group, who has come from Tusita,

“as the One with Vision is seen
in the world together with its devas.
Having dispelled all darkness,
alone, he achieved delight.

“To the Buddha, unattached, impartial,
not a schemer, one who has come as leader of a group,
I have come in need with a question
on behalf of the many here who are bound.

“When a bhikkhu is repulsed
and resorts to a solitary seat,
to the foot of a tree or a charnel ground,
or [to a seat] in mountain caves,

“to various sorts of lodgings,
how many fearful things are there
because of which a bhikkhu should not tremble
in a lodging with little noise?

“How many obstacles in the world
confront one going to the untraveled region,
[obstacles] that a bhikkhu must overcome
when living in a remote lodging?

“What ways of speech should he adopt?
On what resorts here should he rely?
What should be the good behavior and observances
of a bhikkhu who is resolute?

“Having taken up what training,
dwelling unified, judicious, mindful,
should he blow away his own stains
as a smith [removes the flaws] of silver?”

“As one who understands I will tell you
(Sāriputta,” said the Blessed One),
“what is comfortable for one who is repulsed,
if, wishing for enlightenment, in accordance with the Dhamma,
he resorts to a solitary lodging.

“A wise one, a mindful bhikkhu of bounded conduct,
should not be afraid of five perils:
gadflies and other flies, creeping serpents,
encounters with people, four-footed animals,

“nor should he fear followers of other teachings,
even when he sees the many fears they pose.
One seeking the good should conquer
any other obstacles [he encounters].

“Afflicted by illness and hunger,
he should endure cold and excessive heat.
The homeless one, affected by these in many ways,
should remain firm, exerting energy.

“He should not commit theft or speak falsely;
he should suffuse the frail and firm with loving-kindness.
If he should recognize any blemish of the mind,
he should dispel it as ‘a faction of the Dark One.’

“He should not come under the control of anger and arrogance,
but should dig them up by their root too.
Then, withstanding the pleasing and displeasing,
he should conquer them as well.

“Giving precedence to wisdom, rejoicing in the good,
he should suppress those obstacles.
He should vanquish discontent with remote lodgings;
he should vanquish the four factors of lamentation.

“ ‘What will I eat? Where will I eat?
Alas, I slept badly! Where will I sleep?’:
one in training, wandering without abode,
should remove these thoughts of lamentation.

“Having obtained a meal and clothing in time,
he should know moderation for the sake of contentment here.
Guarded in these things, wandering restrained in the village,
even when provoked, he should not utter harsh speech.

“His eyes should be downcast; he should not have restless feet;
intent on jhāna, he should be wakeful.
Inwardly concentrated, based on equanimity,
he should cut off regret and inclination to thought.

“If reproached with words, a mindful one should welcome them;
he should break through a barren heart toward fellow monastics.
He should utter wholesome speech, but not to excess;
he should not intend [speech] that people might blame.

“Further, there are five kinds of dust in the world,
for the removal of which a mindful one should train.
One should vanquish lust for forms and sounds,
for tastes, odors, and tactile objects.

“A bhikkhu who is mindful, well liberated in mind,
should remove desire for these things.
At the proper time rightly investigating the Dhamma,
unified, he should destroy darkness” —
so said the Blessed One.














