9 Poṭṭhapāda Sutta: About Poṭṭhapāda
States of Consciousness
[178] 1. THUS HAVE I HEARD. Once the Lord was staying at Savatthi, in Jeta’s grove, in Anāthapiṇḍika’s park. And at that time the wanderer Poṭṭhapāda was at the debating-hall near the Tinduka tree, in the single-halled park of Queen Mallikā,204 with a large crowd of about three hundred wanderers.
2. Then the Lord, rising early, took his robe and bowl and went to Sāvatthi for alms. But it occurred to him: ‘It is too early to go to Sāvatthi for alms. Suppose I were to go to the debating-hall to see the wanderer Poṭṭhapāda?’ And he did so.
3. There Poṭṭhapāda was sitting with his crowd of wanderers, all shouting and making a great commotion, indulging in various kinds of unedifying conversation, such as about kings, robbers, ministers, armies, dangers, wars, food, drink, clothes, beds, garlands, perfumes, relatives, carriages, villages, towns and cities, [179] countries, women, heroes, street- and well-gossip, talk of the departed, desultory chat, speculations about land and sea, talk of being and non-being.
4. But Poṭṭhapāda saw the Lord coming from a distance, and so he called his followers to order, saying: ‘Be quiet, gentlemen, don’t make a noise, gentlemen! That ascetic Gotama is coming, and he likes quiet and speaks in praise of quiet. If he sees that this company is quiet, he will most likely want to come and visit us.’ At this the wanderers fell silent.
5. Then the Lord came to Poṭṭhapāda, who said: ‘Come, reverend Lord, welcome, reverend Lord! At last the reverend Lord has gone out of his way to come here. Be seated, Lord, a seat is prepared.’
The Lord sat down on the prepared seat, and Potthapada took a low stool and sat down to one side. The Lord said: ‘Poṭṭhapāda, what were you all talking about? What conversation have I interrupted?’
6. Poṭṭhapāda replied: ‘Lord, never mind the conversation we were having just now, it will not be difficult for the Lord to hear about that later. In the past few days, Lord, the discussion among the ascetics and Brahmins of various schools, sitting together and meeting in the debating-hall, has concerned [180] the higher extinction of consciousness,205 and how this takes place. Some said: “One’s perceptions arise and cease without cause or condition. When they arise, one is conscious, when they cease, then one is unconscious.” That is how they explained it. But somebody else said: “No, that is not how it is. Perceptions206 are a person’s self, which comes and goes. When it comes, one is conscious, when it goes, one is unconscious.” Another said: “That is not how it is. There are ascetics and Brahmins of great powers, of great influence. They draw down consciousness into a man and withdraw it. When they draw it down into him, he is conscious, when they withdraw it, he is unconscious.”207 And another said: “No, that is not how it is. There are deities of great powers, of great influence. They draw down consciousness into a man and withdraw it. When they draw it down into him, he is conscious, when they withdraw it, he is unconscious.”208 It was in this connection that I thought of the Lord: “Ah, surely, the Blessed Lord, the Well-Farer, he is supremely skilled209 about these matters! The Blessed Lord well understands the higher extinction of consciousness.” What then, Lord, is this higher extinction of consciousness?’
7. ‘In this matter, Poṭṭhapāda, those ascetics and Brahmins who say one’s perceptions arise and cease without cause or condition are totally wrong. Why is that? One’s perceptions arise and cease [181] owing to a cause and conditions. Some perceptions arise through training, and some pass away through training.’ ‘What is this training?’, the Lord said. ‘Potṭhapāda, a Tathāgata arises in this world an Arahant, fully-enlightened Buddha, endowed with wisdom and conduct, Well-Farer, Knower of the worlds, incomparable Trainer of men to be tamed, Teacher of gods and humans, enlightened and blessed. He, having realised it by his own super-knowledge, proclaims this world with its devas, māras and Brahmās, its princes and people. He preaches the Dhamma which is lovely in its beginning, lovely in its middle, lovely in its ending, in the spirit and in the letter, and displays the fully-perfected and purified holy life. A disciple goes forth and practises the moralities (Sutta 2, verses 41 — 62
	41. ‘This Dhamma is heard by a householder or a householder’s son, or one reborn in some family or other. Having heard this Dhamma, [63] he gains faith in the Tathagata. Having gained this faith, he reflects: “The household life is close and dusty, the homeless life is free as air. It is not easy, living the household life, to live the fully-perfected holy life, purified and polished like a conch-shell. Suppose I were to shave off my hair and beard, don yellow robes and go forth from the household life into homelessness!” And after some time, he abandons his property, small or great, leaves his circle of relatives, small or great, shaves off his hair and beard, dons yellow robes and goes forth into the homeless life.
	42. ‘And having gone forth, he dwells restrained by the restraint of the rules, persisting in right behaviour, seeing danger in the slightest faults, observing the commitments he has taken on regarding body, deed and word, devoted to the skilled and purified life, perfected in morality, with the sense-doors guarded, skilled in mindful awareness and content.
	43. — 62. ‘And how, Sire, is a monk perfected in morality? Abandoning the taking of life, he dwells refraining from taking life, without stick or sword, scrupulous, compassionate, trembling for the welfare of all living beings. Thus he is accomplished in morality. Abandoning the taking of what is not given,... abandoning unchastity,... (and so on through the three sections on morality as Sutta 1, verses 1.8 — 27
[Short Section on Morality]18
[4] 1.8. “‘Abandoning the taking of life, the ascetic Gotama dwells refraining from taking life, without stick or sword, scrupulous, compassionate, trembling for the welfare of all living beings.” Thus the worldling would praise the Tathāgata.19 “Abandoning the taking of what is not given, the ascetic Gotama dwells refraining from taking what is not given, living purely, accepting what is given, awaiting what is given, without stealing. Abandoning unchastity, the ascetic Gotama lives far from it, aloof from the village-practice of sex.20
1.9. “‘Abandoning false speech, the ascetic Gotama dwells refraining from false speech, a truth-speaker, one to be relied on, trustworthy, dependable, not a deceiver of the world. Abandoning malicious speech, he does not repeat there what he has heard here to the detriment of these, or repeat here what he has heard there to the detriment of those. Thus he is a reconciler of those at variance and an encourager of those at one, rejoicing in peace, loving it, delighting in it, one who speaks up for peace. Abandoning harsh speech, he refrains from it. He speaks whatever is blameless, pleasing to the ear, agreeable, reaching the heart, urbane, pleasing and attractive to the multitude. Abandoning idle chatter, he speaks at the right time, what is correct and to the point,21 of Dhamma and discipline. He is a speaker whose words are to be treasured, seasonable, [5] reasoned, well-defined and connected with the goal.”22 Thus the worldling would praise the Tathagata.
1.10. “‘The ascetic Gotama is a refrainer from damaging seeds and crops. He eats once a day and not at night, refraining from eating at improper times.23 He avoids watching dancing, singing, music and shows. He abstains from using garlands, perfumes, cosmetics, ornaments and adornments. He avoids using high or wide beds. He avoids accepting gold and silver.24 He avoids accepting raw grain or raw flesh, he does not accept women and young girls, male or female slaves, sheep and goats, cocks and pigs, elephants, cattle, horses and mares, fields and plots;25 he refrains from running errands, from buying and selling, from cheating with false weights and measures, from bribery and corruption, deception and insincerity, from wounding, killing, imprisoning, highway robbery, and taking food by force.” Thus the worldling would praise the Tathagata.’
[Middle Section on Morality]
1.11. “‘Whereas, gentlemen, some ascetics and Brahmins, feeding on the food of the faithful, are addicted to the destruction of such seeds as are propagated from roots, from stems, from joints, from cuttings, from seeds, the ascetic Gotama refrains from such destruction.” Thus the worldling would praise the Tathagata. [6]
1.12. “‘Whereas some ascetics and Brahmins, feeding on the food of the faithful, remain addicted to the enjoyment of stored-up goods such as food, drink, clothing, carriages, beds, perfumes, meat, the ascetic Gotama refrains from such enjoyment.
1.13. “‘Whereas some ascetics and Brahmins...remain addicted to attending such shows as dancing, singing, music, displays, recitations, hand-music, cymbals and drums, fairy-shows, 26 acrobatic and conjuring tricks,27 combats of elephants, buffaloes, bulls, goats, rams, cocks and quail, fighting with staves, boxing, wrestling, sham-fights, parades, manoeuvres and military reviews, the ascetic Gotama refrains from attending such displays.
1.14. “‘Whereas some ascetics and Brahmins remain addicted to such games and idle pursuits as eight- or ten-row chess,28 ‘chess in the air’,29 hopscotch, spillikins, dicing, hitting sticks, ‘hand-pictures’, ball-games, blowing through toy pipes, playing with toy ploughs, turning somersaults, playing with toy windmills, measures, carriages, [7] and bows, guessing letters,30 guessing thoughts,31 mimicking deformities, the ascetic Gotama refrains from such idle pursuits.
1.15. “‘Whereas some ascetics and Brahmins remain addicted to high and wide beds and long chairs, couches adorned with animal figures,32 fleecy or variegated coverlets, coverlets with hair on both sides or one side, silk coverlets, embroidered with gems or without, elephant-, horse- or chariot-rugs, choice spreads of antelope-hide, couches with awnings, or with red cushions at both ends, the ascetic Gotama refrains from such high and wide beds.
1.16. “‘Whereas some ascetics and Brahmins remain addicted to such forms of self-adornment and embellishment as rubbing the body with perfumes, massaging, bathing in scented water, shampooing, using mirrors, ointments, garlands, scents, unguents, cosmetics, bracelets, headbands, fancy sticks, bottles, swords, sunshades, decorated sandals, turbans, gems, yak-tail fans, long-fringed white robes, the ascetic Gotama refrains from such self-adornment.
1.17. “‘Whereas some ascetics and Brahmins remain addicted to such unedifying conversation33 as about kings, robbers, ministers, armies, dangers, wars, food, drink, clothes, beds, garlands, perfumes, relatives, carriages, villages, towns and cities, countries, women, [8] heroes, street- and well-gossip, talk of the departed, desultory chat, speculations about land and sea,34 talk about being and non-being,35 the ascetic Gotama refrains from such conversation.
1.18. “‘Whereas some ascetics and Brahmins remain addicted to disputation such as: ‘You don’t understand this doctrine and discipline - I do!’ ‘How could you understand this doctrine and discipline?’ ‘Your way is all wrong — mine is right!’ ‘I am consistent - you aren’t!’ ‘You said last what you should have said first, and you said first what you should have said last!’ ‘What you took so long to think up has been refuted!’ ‘Your argument has been overthrown, you’re defeated!’ ‘Go on, save your doctrine — get out of that if you can!’ the ascetic Gotama refrains from such disputation.36
1.19. “‘Whereas some ascetics and Brahmins remain addicted to such things as running errands and messages, such as for kings, ministers, nobles, Brahmins, householders and young men who say: ‘Go here — go there! Take this there — bring that from there!’ the ascetic Gotama refrains from such errand-running.
1.20. “‘Whereas some ascetics and Brahmins remain addicted to deception, patter, hinting, belittling, and are always .on the make for further gains, the ascetic Gotama refrains from such deception.” Thus the worldling would praise the Tathāgata.’37
[Large Section on Morality]
1.21. “‘Whereas some ascetics and Brahmins, feeding on the food of the faithful, make their living by such base arts, such wrong means of livelihood as palmistry,38 divining by signs, portents, dreams, body-marks, mouse-gnawings, fire-oblations, oblations from a ladle, of husks, rice-powder, rice-grains, ghee or oil, from the mouth or of blood, reading the finger-tips, house- and garden-lore, skill in charms, ghost-lore, earth-house lore,39 snake-lore, poison-lore, rat-lore, bird-lore, crow-lore, foretelling a person’s life-span, charms against arrows, knowledge of animals’ cries, the ascetic Gotama refrains from such base arts and wrong means of livelihood.
1.22. “‘Whereas some ascetics and Brahmins make their living by such base arts as judging the marks of gems, sticks, clothes, swords, spears, arrows, weapons, women, men, boys, girls, male and female slaves, elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, cows, goats, rams, cocks, quail, iguanas, bamboo-rats,40 tortoises, deer, the ascetic Gotama refrains from such base arts.
1.23. “‘Whereas some ascetics and Brahmins make their living by such base arts as predicting: ‘The chiefs41 will march out — the chiefs will march back’, ‘Our chiefs [10] will advance and the other chiefs will retreat’, ‘Our chiefs will win and the other chiefs will lose’, ‘The other chiefs will win and ours will lose’, ‘Thus there will be victory for one side and defeat for the other’, the ascetic Gotama refrains from such base arts.
1.24. “‘Whereas some ascetics and Brahmins make their living by such base arts as predicting an eclipse of the moon, the sun, a star; that the sun and moon will go on their proper course — will go astray; that a star will go on its proper course — will go astray; that there will be a shower of meteors, a blaze in the sky, an earthquake, thunder; a rising, setting, darkening, brightening of the moon, the sun, the stars; and ‘such will be the outcome of these things’, the ascetic Gotama refrains from such base arts and wrong means of livelihood. [11]
1.25. “‘Whereas some ascetics and Brahmins make their living by such base arts as predicting good or bad rainfall; a good or bad harvest; security, danger; disease, health; or accounting, computing, calculating, poetic composition, philosophising, the ascetic Gotama refrains from such base arts and wrong means of livelihood.
1.26. “‘Whereas some ascetics and Brahmins make their living by such base arts as arranging the giving and taking in marriage, engagements and divorces; [declaring the time for] saving and spending, bringing good or bad luck, procuring abortions,42 using spells to bind the tongue, binding the jaw, making the hands jerk, causing deafness, getting answers with a mirror, a girl-medium, a deva; worshipping the sun or Great Brahma, breathing fire, invoking the goddess of luck, the ascetic Gotama refrains from such base arts and wrong means of livelihood.
1.27. “‘Whereas some ascetics and Brahmins, feeding on the food of the faithful, make their living by such base arts, such wrong means of livelihood as appeasing the devas and redeeming vows to them, making earth-house spells, causing virility or impotence, preparing and consecrating building-sites, giving ritual rinsings and bathings, making sacrifices, giving emetics, purges, expectorants and phlegmagogues, giving ear-, eye-, nose-medicine, ointments and counter-ointments, eye-surgery, surgery, pediatry, using balms to counter the side-effects of previous remedies, the ascetic Gotama refrains from such base arts and wrong means of livelihood.”43 It is, monks, for such elementary, inferior matters of moral practice that the worldling would praise the Tathagata.
). A monk refrains from such base arts and wrong means of livelihood. Thus he is perfected in morality. [64 — 69]
).
That for him is morality.
8. ‘And then, Poṭṭhapāda, that monk who is perfected in morality sees no danger from any side... (as Sutta 2, verse 63). In this way he is perfected in morality.
9 — 10. He guards the sense-doors, etc. (Sutta 2, verses 64 — 75
	64. ‘And how, Sire, is he a guardian of the sense-doors? Here a monk, on seeing a visible object with the eye, does not grasp at its major signs or secondary characteristics. Because greed and sorrow, evil unskilled states, would overwhelm him if he dwelt leaving this eye-faculty unguarded, so he practises guarding it, he protects the eye-faculty, develops restraint of the eye-faculty. On hearing a sound with the ear, ... on smelling an odour with the nose, ... on tasting a flavour with the tongue,...on feeling an object with the body,...on thinking a thought with the mind, he does not grasp at its major signs or secondary characteristics, ... he develops restraint of the mind-faculty. He experiences within himself the blameless bliss that comes from maintaining this Ariyan guarding of the faculties. In this way, Sire, a monk is a guardian of the sense-doors.
	65. ‘And how, Sire, is a monk accomplished in mindfulness and clear awareness? Here a monk acts with clear awareness in going forth and back, in looking ahead or behind him, in bending and stretching, in wearing his outer and inner robe and carrying his bowl, in eating, drinking, chewing and swallowing, in evacuating and urinating, in walking, standing, sitting, lying down, in waking, in speaking and in keeping silent he acts with clear awareness. In this way, [71] a monk is accomplished in mindfulness and clear awareness.
	66. ‘And how is a monk contented? Here, a monk is satisfied with a robe to protect his body, with alms to satisfy his stomach, and having accepted sufficient, he goes on his way. Just as a bird with wings flies hither and thither, burdened by nothing but its wings, so he is satisfied... In this way, Sire, a monk is contented.
	67. ‘Then he, equipped with this Ariyan morality, with this Ariyan restraint of the senses, with this Ariyan contentment, finds a solitary lodging, at the root of a forest tree, in a mountain cave or gorge, a charnel-ground, a jungle-thicket, or in the open air on a heap of straw. Then, having eaten after his return from the alms-round, he sits down cross-legged, holding his body erect, and concentrates on keeping mindfulness established before him.119
	68. ‘Abandoning worldly desires, he dwells with a mind freed from worldly desires, and his mind is purified of them. Abandoning ill-will and hatred ... and by compassionate love for the welfare of all living beings, his mind is purified of ill-will and hatred. Abandoning sloth-and-torpor, ... perceiving light,120 mindful and clearly aware, his mind is purified of sloth-and-torpor. Abandoning worry-and-flurry... and with an inwardly calmed mind his heart is purified of worry-and-flurry. Abandoning doubt, he dwells with doubt left behind, without uncertainty as to what things are wholesome, his mind is purified of doubt.
	69. ‘Just as a man who had taken a loan to develop his business, and whose business had prospered, might pay off his old debts, and with what was left over could support a wife, might think: “Before this I developed my business by borrowing, [72] but now it has prospered... ”, and he would rejoice and be glad about that.
	70. ‘Just as a man who was ill, suffering, terribly sick, with no appetite and weak in body, might after a time recover, and regain his appetite and bodily strength, and he might think: “Before this I was ill... ”, and he would rejoice and be glad about that.
	71. ‘Just as a man might be bound in prison, and after a time he might be freed from his bonds without any loss, with no deduction from his possessions. He might think: “Before this I was in prison...”, and he would rejoice and be glad about that.
	72. ‘Just as a man might be a slave, not his own master, dependent on another, unable to go where he liked, and after some time he might be freed from slavery, able to go where he liked, might think: “Before this I was a slave...”[73] And he would rejoice and be glad about that.
	73. ‘Just as a man, laden with goods and wealth, might go on a long journey through the desert where food was scarce and danger abounded, and after a time he would get through the desert and arrive safe and sound at the edge of a village, might think: “Before this I was in danger, now I am safe at the edge of a village”, and he would rejoice and be glad about that.
	74. ‘As long, Sire, as a monk does not perceive the disappearance of the five hindrances in himself,121 he feels as if in debt, in sickness, in bonds, in slavery, on a desert journey. But when he perceives the disappearance of the five hindrances in himself, it is as if he were freed from debt, from sickness, from bonds, from slavery, from the perils of the desert.
	75. ‘And when he knows that these five hindrances have left him, gladness arises in him, from gladness comes delight, from the delight in his mind his body is tranquillised, with a tranquil body he feels joy, and with joy his mind is concentrated. Being thus detached from sense-desires, detached from unwholesome states, he enters and remains in the first jhāna, which is with thinking and pondering, born of detachment, filled with delight and joy. And with this delight and joy born of detachment, he so suffuses, drenches, fills and irradiates his body that there is no spot in his entire body that is untouched by this delight and joy born of detachment. [74]
).
[182] Having reached the first jhāna, he remains in it. And whatever sensations of lust that he previously had disappear. At that time there is present a true but subtle perception of delight and happiness,210 born of detachment, and he becomes one who is conscious of this delight and happiness. In this way some perceptions arise through training, and some pass away through training. And this is that training’, said the Lord.
11. ‘Again, a monk, with the subsiding of thinking and pondering, by gaining inner tranquillity and unity of mind, reaches and remains in the second jhāna, which is free from thinking and pondering, born of concentration, filled with delight and happiness. His former true but subtle perception of delight and happiness born of detachment vanishes. At that time there arises a true but subtle perception [183] of delight and happiness born of concentration, and he becomes one who is conscious of this delight and happiness. In this way some perceptions arise through training, and some pass away through training.
12. ‘Again, after the fading away of delight he dwells in equanimity, mindful and clearly aware, and he experiences in his body that pleasant feeling of which the Noble Ones say: “Happy dwells the man of equanimity and mindfulness”, and he reaches and remains in the third jhāna. His former true but subtle sense of delight and happiness born of concentration vanishes, and there arises at that time a true but subtle sense of equanimity and happiness, and he becomes one who is conscious of this true but subtle sense of equanimity and happiness. In this way some perceptions arise through training, and some pass away through training.
13. ‘Again, with the abandonment of pleasure and pain, and with the disappearance of previous joy and grief, he reaches and remains in the fourth jhana, a state beyond pleasure and pain, purified by equanimity and mindfulness. His former true but subtle sense of equanimity and happiness vanishes, and there arises a true but subtle sense of neither happiness nor unhappiness, and he becomes one who is conscious of this true but subtle sense of neither happiness nor unhappiness. In this way some perceptions arise through training, and some pass away through training.
14. ‘Again, by passing entirely beyond bodily sensations, by the disappearance of all sense of resistance and by non-attraction to the perception of diversity, seeing that space is infinite, he reaches and remains in the Sphere of Infinite Space. In this way some perceptions arise through training, and some pass away through training.
15. ‘Again, by passing entirely beyond [184] the Sphere of Infinite Space, seeing that consciousness is infinite, he reaches and remains in the Sphere of Infinite Consciousness. In this way some perceptions arise through training, and some pass away through training.
16. ‘Again, by passing entirely beyond the Sphere of Infinite Consciousness, seeing that there is no thing, he reaches and remains in the Sphere of No-Thingness, and he becomes one who is conscious of this true but subtle perception of the Sphere of No-Thingness. In this way some perceptions arise through training, and some pass away through training. And this is that training’, said the Lord.
17. ‘Potthapada, from the moment when a monk has gained this controlled perception,211 he proceeds from stage to stage till he reaches the limit of perception. When he has reached the limit of perception it occurs to him: “Mental activity is worse for me, lack of mental activity is better. If I were to think and imagine,212 these perceptions [that I have attained] would cease, and coarser perceptions would arise in me. Suppose I were not to think or imagine?” So he neither thinks nor imagines. And then, in him, just these perceptions arise, but other, coarser perceptions do not arise. He attains cessation. And that, Poṭṭhapāda, is the way in which the cessation of perception is brought about by successive steps.
18. ‘What do you think, Poṭṭhapāda? Have you heard of this before?’ ‘No, Lord. As I understand it, the Lord has said: “Poṭṭhapāda, from the moment when a monk has gained this controlled perception, he proceeds from stage to stage until he reaches the limit of perception... He attains cessation [185] ... and that is the way in which the cessation of perception is brought about by successive steps.”’ ‘That is right, Poṭṭhapāda.’
19. ‘Lord, do you teach that the summit of perception is just one, or that it is many?’ ‘I teach it as both one and many.’ ‘Lord, how is it one, and how is it many?’ ‘According as he attains successively to the cessation of each perception, so I teach the summit of that perception: thus I teach both one summit of perception, and I also teach many.’
20. ‘Lord, does perception arise before knowledge, or knowledge arise before perception, or do both arise simultaneously? ’ ‘Perception arises first, Poṭṭhapāda, then knowledge, and from the arising of perception comes the arising of knowledge. And one knows: “Thus conditioned, knowledge arises.” In this way you can see how perception arises first, and then knowledge, and that from the arising of perception comes the arising of knowledge.’213
21. ‘Lord, is perception a person’s self, or is perception one thing, and self another?’214 ‘Well, Poṭṭhapāda, do you postulate 215 a self?’ [186] ‘Lord, I postulate a gross self, material, composed of the four elements, and feeding on solid food.’ ‘But with such a gross self, Poṭṭhapāda, perception would be one thing, and the self another. You can see that in this way. Given such a gross self, certain perceptions would arise in a person, and others pass away. In this way you can see that perception must be one thing, the self another.’216
22. ‘Lord, I postulate a mind-made self complete with all its parts, not defective in any sense-organ.’217 ‘But with such a mind-made self, perception would be one thing, and the self another...’ [187]
23. ‘Lord, I assume a formless self, made up of perception. ’218 ‘But with such a formless self, perception would be one thing, and self another...’
24. ‘But Lord, is it possible for me to know whether perception is a person’s self, or whether perception is one thing, and self another?’ ‘Poṭṭhāpada, it is difficult for one of different views, a different faith, under different influences, with different pursuits and a different training to know whether these are two different things or not.’
25. ‘Well, Lord, if this question of self and perceptions is difficult for one like me — tell me: Is the world eternal?219 Is only this true and the opposite false?’ ‘Poṭṭhapāda, I have not declared that the world is eternal and that the opposite view is false.’ ‘Well, Lord, is the world not eternal?’ ‘I have not declared that the world is not eternal...’ ‘Well, Lord, is the world infinite,... not infinite?...’ [188] ‘I have not declared that the world is not infinite and that the opposite view is false.’
26. ‘Well, Lord, is the soul the same as the body, ... is the soul one thing and the body another?’ ‘I have not declared that the soul is one thing and the body another.’
27. ‘Well, Lord, does the Tathāgata exist after death? Is only this true and all else false?’ ‘I have not declared that the Tathāgata exists after death.’ ‘Well, Lord, does the Tathāgata not exist after death,...both exist and not exist after death? ... neither exist nor not exist after death?’ ‘I have not declared that the Tathāgata neither exists nor does not exist after death, and that all else is false.’
28. ‘But, Lord, why has the Lord not declared these things?’ ‘Poṭṭhāpada, that is not conducive to the purpose, not conducive to Dhamma, [189] not the way to embark on the holy life; it does not lead to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to calm, to higher knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbāna. That is why I have not declared it.’
29. ‘But, Lord, what has the Lord declared?’ ‘Poṭṭhapāda, I have declared: “This is suffering, this is the origin of suffering, this is the cessation of suffering, and this is the path leading to the cessation of suffering.”’
30. ‘But, Lord, why has the Lord declared this?’ ‘Because, Poṭṭhapāda, this is conducive to the purpose, conducive to Dhamma, the way to embark on the holy life; it leads to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to calm, to higher knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbāna. That is why I have declared it.’
‘So it is, Lord, so it is, Well-Farer. And now is the time for the Blessed Lord to do as he sees fit.’ Then the Lord rose from his seat and went away.
31. Then the wanderers, as soon as the Lord had left, reproached, sneered and jeered at Poṭṭhapāda from all sides, saying: ‘Whatever the ascetic Gotama says, Poṭṭhapāda agrees with him: “So it is, Lord, so it is, Well-Farer!” We don’t understand a word of the ascetic Gotama’s whole discourse: “Is the world eternal or not? — Is it finite or infinite? — Is the soul the same as the body or different? — Does the Tathāgata exist after death or not, [190] or both, or neither?”’
Poṭṭhapāda replied: ‘I don’t understand either about whether the world is eternal or not...or whether the Tathāgata exists after death or not, or both, or neither. But the ascetic Gotama teaches a true and real way of practice which is consonant with Dhamma and grounded in Dhamma. And why should not a man like me express approval of such a true and real practice, so well taught by the ascetic Gotama?’
32. Two or three days later, Citta, the son of the elephant-trainer, went with Poṭṭhāpada to see the Lord. Citta prostrated himself before the Lord and sat down to one side. Potthapada exchanged courtesies with the Lord, sat down to one side, and told him what had happened. [191]
33. ‘Poṭṭhapāda, all those wanderers are blind and sightless, you alone among them are sighted. Some things I have taught and pointed out, Poṭṭhāpada, as being certain, others as being uncertain. Which are the things I have pointed out as uncertain? “The world is eternal” I have declared to be uncertain... “The Tathāgata exists after death ...” Why? Because they are not conducive... to Nibbāna. That is why I have declared them as uncertain.
‘But what things have I pointed out as certain? “This is suffering, [192] this is the origin of suffering, this is the cessation of suffering, this is the path leading to the cessation of suffering.” Why? Because they are conducive to the purpose, conducive to Dhamma, the way to embark on the holy life; they lead to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to calm, to higher knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbana. That is why I have declared them as certain.
34. ‘Poṭṭhapāda, there are some ascetics and Brahmins who declare and believe that after death the self is entirely happy and free from disease. I approached them and asked if this was indeed what they declared and believed, and they replied: “Yes.” Then I said: “Do you, friends, living in the world, know and see it as an entirely happy place?” and they replied: “No.” I said: “Have you ever experienced a single night or day, or half a night or day, that was entirely happy?” and they replied: “No.” I said: “Do you know a path or a practice whereby an entirely happy world might be brought about?” and they replied: “No.” I said: “Have you heard the voices of deities who have been reborn in an entirely happy world, saying: ‘The attainment of an entirely happy world has been well and rightly gained, and we, gentlemen, [193] have been reborn in such a realm’?” and they replied: “No.” What do you think, Poṭṭhapāda? Such being the case, does not the talk of those ascetics and Brahmins turn out to be stupid?
35. ‘It is just as if a man were to say: “1 am going to seek out and love the most beautiful girl in the country.” They might say to him: “Well, as to this most beautiful girl in the country, do you know whether she belongs to the Khattiya, the Brahmin, the merchant or the artisan class?” and he would say: “No.” Then they might say: “Well, do you know her name, her clan, whether she is tall or short or of medium height, whether she is dark or light-complexioned or sallow-skinned, or what village or town or city she comes from?” and he would say: “No.” And they might say: “Well then, you don’t know or see the one you seek for and desire?” and he would say: “No.” Does not the talk of that man turn out to be stupid?’ ‘Certainly, Lord.’
36. ‘And so it is with those ascetics and Brahmins who declare and believe that after death the self is entirely happy and free from disease... [194] Does not their talk turn out to be stupid?’ ‘Certainly, Lord.’
37. ‘It is just as if a man were to build a staircase for a palace at a crossroads. People might say to him: “Well now, this staircase for a palace that you are building — do you know whether the palace will face east, or west, or north or south, or whether it will be high, low or of medium height?” and he would say: “No.” And they might say: “Well then, you don’t know or see what kind of a palace you are building the staircase for?” and he would say: “No.” Don’t you think that man’s talk would turn out to be stupid?’ ‘Certainly, Lord.’
38. (as verse 34) [195]
39. ‘Poṭṭhapāda, there are three kinds of “acquired self”:220 the gross acquired self, the mind-made acquired self, the formless acquired self. What is the gross acquired self? It has form, is composed of the four great elements, nourished by material food. What is the mind-made self? It has form, complete with all its parts, not defective in any sense-organ. What is the formless acquired self? It is without form, and made up of perception.
40. ‘But I teach a doctrine for getting rid of the gross acquired self, whereby defiling mental states disappear and states tending to purification grow strong, and one gains and remains in the purity and perfection of wisdom here [196] and now, having realised and attained it by one’s own super-knowledge. Now, Poṭṭhāpada, you might think: “Perhaps these defiling mental states might disappear..., and one might still be unhappy.”221 That is not how it should be regarded. If defiling states disappear..., nothing but happiness and delight develops, tranquillity, mindfulness and clear awareness — and that is a happy state.
41. ‘I also teach a doctrine for getting rid of the mind-made acquired self...(as verse 40).
42. ‘I also teach a doctrine for getting rid of the formless acquired self...(as verse 40). [197]
43. ‘Poṭṭhapāda, if others ask us: “What, friend, is this gross acquired self whose abandonment you preach ... ?” being so asked, we should reply: “This is222 that gross acquired self for the getting rid of which we teach a doctrine...”
44. ‘If others ask us: “What is this mind-made acquired self ...?” (as verse 43). [198]
45. ‘If others ask us: “What is this formless acquired self ...?” (as verse 43). What do you think, Poṭṭhapāda? Does not that statement turn out to be well-founded?’ ‘Certainly, Lord.’
46. ‘It is just as if a man were to build a staircase for a palace, which was below that palace. They might say to him: “Well now, this staircase for a palace that you are building, do you know whether the palace will face east or west, or north or south, or whether it will be high, low or of medium height?” and he would say: “This staircase is right under the palace.” Don’t you think that man’s statement would be well-founded?’ ‘Certainly, Lord.’ [199]
47. ‘In just the same way, Poṭṭhapāda, if others ask us: “What is this gross acquired self...?” “What is this mind-made acquired self...?” “What is this formless acquired self ... ?” we reply: “This is this [gross, mind-made, formless] acquired self for the getting rid of which we teach a doctrine, whereby defiling mental states disappear and states tending to purification grow strong, and one gains and remains in the purity and perfection of wisdom here and now, having realised and attained it by one’s own super-knowledge.” Don’t you think that statement is well-founded?’ ‘Certainly, Lord.’
48. At this, Citta, son of the elephant-trainer, said to the Lord: ‘Lord, whenever the gross acquired self is present, would it be wrong to assume the existence of the mind-made acquired self, or of the formless acquired self? Does only the gross acquired self truly exist then? And similarly with the mind-made acquired self, and the formless acquired self?’
49. ‘Citta, whenever the gross acquired self is present, we do not at that time speak of a mind-made acquired self, [200] we do not speak of a formless acquired self. We speak only of a gross acquired self.223 Whenever the mind-made acquired self is present, we speak only of a mind-made acquired self, and whenever the formless acquired self is present, we speak only of a formless acquired self.
‘Citta, suppose they were to ask you: “Did you exist in the past or didn’t you, will you exist in the future or won’t you, do you exist now or don’t you?” how would you answer?’
‘Lord, if I were asked such a question, I would say: “I did exist in the past, I did not not exist; I shall exist in the future, I shall not not exist; I do exist now, I do not not exist.” That, Lord, would be my answer.’
50. ‘But, Citta, if they asked: “The past acquired self that you had, is that your only true acquired self, and are the future and present ones false? Or is the one you will have in the future the only true one, and are the past and present ones false? Or is your present acquired self the only true one, and are the past and future ones false?” how would you reply?’
‘Lord, if they asked me these things, [201] I would reply: “My past acquired self was at the time my only true one, the future and present ones were false. My future acquired self will then be the only true one, the past and present ones will be false. My present acquired self is now the only true one, the past and future ones are false.” That is how I would reply.’
51. ‘In just the same way, Citta, whenever the gross acquired self is present, we do not at that time speak of a mind-made acquired self... [or] of a formless acquired self.
52. ‘In just the same way, Citta, from the cow we get milk, from the milk curds, from the curds butter, from the butter ghee, and from the ghee cream of ghee. And when there is milk we don’t speak of curds, of butter, of ghee or of cream of ghee, we speak of milk; when there are curds we don’t speak of butter...; when there is cream of ghee... we speak of cream of ghee. [202]
53. ‘So too, whenever the gross acquired self is present, we do not speak of the mind-made or formless acquired self; whenever the mind-made acquired self is present, we do not speak of the gross or formless acquired self; whenever the formless acquired self is present, we do not speak of the gross acquired self or the mind-made acquired self, we speak of the formless acquired self. But, Citta, these are merely names, expressions, turns of speech, designations in common use in the world, which the Tathāgata uses without misapprehending them.’224
54. And at these words Poṭṭhapāda the wanderer said to the Lord: ‘Excellent, Lord, excellent! It is as if someone were to set up what had been knocked down, or to point out the way to one who had got lost, or to bring an oil-lamp into a dark place, so that those with eyes could see what was there. Just so the Blessed Lord has expounded the Dhamma in various ways. Lord, I go for refuge to the Lord, the Dhamma and the Sangha. May the Lord accept me as a lay-follower who has taken refuge in him from this day forth as long as life shall last!’
55. But Citta, son of the elephant-trainer, said to the Lord: ‘Excellent, Lord, excellent! It is as if someone were to set up what had been knocked down, or to point out the way to one who had got lost, or to bring an oil-lamp into a dark place, so that those with eyes could see what was there. Just so the Blessed Lord has expounded the Dhamma in various ways. Lord, I go for refuge to the Lord, the Dhamma and the Sangha. May I, Lord, receive the going-forth at the Lord’s hands, may I receive ordination!’
56. And Citta, son of the elephant-trainer, received the going-forth at the Lord’s hands, and the ordination. And the newly-ordained Venerable Citta, alone, secluded, unwearying, zealous and resolute, in a short time attained to that for the sake of which young men of good birth go forth from the household life into [203] homelessness, that unexcelled culmination of the holy life, having realised it here and now by his own super-knowledge and dwelt therein, knowing: ‘Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is nothing further here.’
 
And the Venerable Citta, son of the elephant-trainer, became another of the Arahants.
