Collection of Middle Length Discourses, Shorter Chapter on the Pairs
The Lesser Series of Questions-and-Answers

Thus I heard: At one time the Blessed One was living near Rājagaha at the Squirrel’s Feeding Place in Bamboo Wood.

The devotee Visākha approached the nun Dhammadinnā, and after approaching and worshipping the nun Dhammadinnā, he sat on one side. While sitting on one side the devotee Visākha said this to the nun Dhammadinnā:

-

“ ‘Embodiment, embodiment,’ is said, Noble Lady. What, Noble Lady, is said to be embodiment by the Blessed One?”

“These five aggregates affected by clinging, friend Visākha, are said to be embodiment by the Blessed One, as follows:

the form aggregate affected by clinging, the feelings aggregate affected by clinging, the perceptions aggregate affected by clinging, the (mental) formations aggregate affected by clinging, the consciousness aggregate affected by clinging.

These five aggregates affected by clinging, friend Visākha, are said to be embodiment by the Blessed One.”

-

“Well said, Noble Lady,” said the devotee Visākha, and after greatly rejoicing and gladly receiving this word of the nun Dhammadinnā, he asked a further question to the nun Dhammadinnā:

“ ‘The arising of embodiment, the arising of embodiment,’ is said, Noble Lady. What, Noble Lady, is said to be the arising of embodiment by the Blessed One?”

“It is that craving which leads to continuation in existence, friend Visākha, which is connected with enjoyment and passion, greatly enjoying this and that, as follows: craving for sense pleasures craving for continuation craving for discontinuation.

This, friend Visākha, is said to be the arising of embodiment by the Blessed One.

-

“ ‘The cessation of embodiment, the cessation of embodiment,’ is said, Noble Lady. What, Noble Lady, is said to be the cessation of embodiment by the Blessed One?”

“It is the complete fading away and cessation without remainder of that craving, friend Visākha, liberation, letting go, release and non-adherence.

This, friend Visākha, is said to be the cessation of embodiment by the Blessed One.”

-

“ ‘The path leading to the cessation of embodiment, the path leading to the cessation of embodiment,’ is said, Noble Lady. What, Noble Lady, is said to be the path leading to the cessation of embodiment by the Blessed One?”

“It is this noble path with eight factors, friend Visākha, as follows: right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right endeavour, right mindfulness, right concentration.”

-

“Is this clinging, Noble Lady, (the same as) the five aggregates affected by clinging, or is clinging different from the five aggregates affected by clinging”

“This clinging, friend Visākha, is not (the same as) the five aggregates affected by clinging, nor is clinging different from the five aggregates affected by clinging. But whatever desire and passion there is for the five aggregates affected by clinging, that is the clinging right there.”

-

“But what, Noble Lady, is embodiment view?”

“Here, friend Visākha, an unlearned worldling, one who doesn’t meet the Noble Ones, who is unskilled in the Noble Dhamma, untrained in the Noble Dhamma, one who doesn’t meet Good People, who is unskilled in the Good People’s Dhamma, untrained in the Good People’s Dhamma,

views bodily form as self, or self as endowed with bodily form, or bodily form as in self, or self as in bodily form.

Views feeling as self, or self as endowed with feeling, or feeling as in self, or self as in feeling.

Views perception as self, or self as endowed with perception, or perception as in self, or self as in perception.

Views (volitional) formations as self, or self as endowed with (volitional) formations, or (volitional) formations as in self, or self as in (volitional) formations.

Views consciousness as self, or self as endowed with consciousness, or consciousness as in self, or self as in consciousness.

This, friend Visākha, is embodiment view.”

-

“But how, Noble Lady, is there no embodiment view?”

“Here, friend Visākha, a learned noble disciple, one who meets the Noble Ones, who is skilled in the Noble Dhamma, trained in the Noble Dhamma, one who meets Good People, who is skilled in the Good People’s Dhamma, trained in the Good People’s Dhamma,

doesn’t view bodily form as self, or self as endowed with bodily form, or bodily form as in self, or self as in bodily form.

Doesn’t view feeling as self, or self as endowed with feeling, or feeling as in self, or self as in feeling.

Doesn’t view perception as self, or self as endowed with perception, or perception as in self, or self as in perception.

Doesn’t view (volitional) formations as self, or self as endowed with (volitional) formations, or (volitional) formations as in self, or self as in (volitional) formations.

Doesn’t view consciousness as self, or self as endowed with consciousness, or consciousness as in self, or self as in consciousness.

Thus, friend Visākha, there is no embodiment view.”

-

“But what, Noble Lady, is the Eightfold Noble Path?”

“It is this noble path with eight factors, friend Visākha, as follows:

right view, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right endeavour, right mindfulness, right concentration.”

-

“But is the eightfold Noble Path, Noble Lady, conditioned or unconditioned?”

“The eightfold Noble Path, friend Visākha, is conditioned.”

-

“Are the three constituents comprised within the eightfold Noble Path, Noble Lady, or is the eightfold Noble Path comprised within the three constituents?”

“The three constituents are not comprised within the eightfold Noble Path, friend Visākha, but the eightfold Noble Path is comprised within the three constituents.

Whatever is right speech, friend Visākha, and whatever is right action, and whatever is right livelihood, these things are comprised within the virtue constituent.

Whatever is right endeavour, and whatever is right mindfulness, and whatever is right concentration, these things are comprised within the concentration constituent.

Whatever is right view, and whatever is right thought, these things are comprised within the wisdom constituent.

-

“But what, Noble Lady, is concentration,

what are the causes of concentration,

what are the accessories to concentration,

what is the development of concentration?”

“Whatever is one-pointedness of mind, friend Visākha, that is concentration,

the four ways of attending to mindfulness are the causes of concentration,

the four right endeavours are the accessories to concentration,

whatever repetition of these things there is, their development, being made much of, this is the development of concentration herein.”

-

“But what, Noble Lady, are the formations?”

“There are these three formations, friend Visākha: the bodily formation, the speech formation, the mental formation.”

-

“But what, Noble Lady, is bodily formation, what is speech formation, what is mental formation?”

“In-breathing and out-breathing, friend Visākha, is bodily formation, thinking and reflection is speech formation, perception and feeling is mental formation.”

-

“But why is in-breathing and out-breathing, Noble Lady, bodily formation, why is thinking and reflection speech formation, why is perception and feeling mental formation?”

“In-breathing and out-breathing, friend Visākha, are bodily, these things are bound up with the body, therefore in-breathing and out-breathing is a bodily formation.

Having thought and reflected beforehand, friend Visākha, he afterwards breaks forth with a word, therefore thinking and reflection is a speech formation.

Perception and feeling are mental factors, these things are bound up with the mind, therefore perception and feeling are mental formations.”

-

“But how, Noble Lady, is the cessation of perception and feeling attained?”

“A monastic who is attaining the cessation of perception and feeling, friend Visākha, does not think:

‘I will attain the cessation of perception and feeling,’ or

‘I am attaining the cessation of perception and feeling,’ or

‘I have attained the cessation of perception and feeling.’

But previously his mind has been developed so that it leads to that state.”

-

“But for a monastic who has attained the cessation of perception and feeling, Noble Lady, which things cease first: bodily formation, or speech formation, or mental formation?”

“For a monastic who is attaining the cessation of perception and feeling, friend Visākha, first speech formation ceases, then bodily formation ceases, then mental formation ceases.”

-

“But what, Noble Lady, is the emergence from the cessation of perception and feeling?”

“A monastic who is emerging from the cessation of perception and feeling, friend Visākha, does not think:

‘I will emerge from the cessation of perception and feeling,’ or,

‘I am emerging from the cessation of perception and feeling,’ or,

‘I have emerged from the cessation of perception and feeling,’

But previously his mind has been developed so that it leads to that state.”

-

“But for a monastic who has emerged from the cessation of perception and feeling, Noble Lady, which things arise first: bodily formation, or speech formation, or mental formation?”

“For a monastic who is emerging from the cessation of perception and feeling, friend Visākha, first mental formation arises, then bodily formation arises, then speech formation arises.”

-

“Having emerged from the cessation of perception and feeling, Noble Lady, how many contacts touch that monastic?”

“Having emerged from the cessation of perception and feeling, friend Visākha, three contacts touch that monastic: emptiness contact, signlessness contact, desirelessness contact.”

-

“For a monastic who has emerged from the cessation of perception and feeling, Noble Lady, what does his mind incline towards, what does it slope towards, what does it slant towards?”

“For a monastic who has emerged from the cessation of perception and feeling, friend Visākha, his mind inclines towards seclusion, it slopes towards seclusion, it slants towards seclusion.”

-

“But how many feelings are there, Noble Lady?”

“There are three feelings, friend Visākha: pleasant feeling, unpleasant feeling, and neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant feeling.”

-

“But what, Noble Lady, is pleasant feeling, what is unpleasant feeling, what is neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant feeling?”

“Whatever, friend Visākha, is bodily or mentally pleasant and agreeable feeling: that is pleasant feeling.

Whatever, friend Visākha, is bodily or mentally unpleasant and disagreeable feeling: that is unpleasant feeling.

Whatever, friend Visākha, is bodily or mentally neither agreeable nor disagreeable feeling: that is neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant feeling.”

-

“But regarding pleasant feeling, Noble Lady: what is pleasant, what is unpleasant,

regarding unpleasant feeling: what is pleasant, what is unpleasant,

regarding neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant feeling: what is pleasant, what is unpleasant?”

“Pleasant feeling, friend Visākha, is pleasant when it persists, unpleasant when it changes,

unpleasant feeling is unpleasant when it persists, pleasant when it changes,

neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant feeling is pleasant when known, and unpleasant when unknown.”

-

“But for pleasant feeling, Noble Lady, what tendency underlies it,

for unpleasant feeling what tendency underlies it,

for neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant feeling what tendency underlies it?”

“For pleasant feeling, friend Visākha, the tendency to passion underlies it,

for unpleasant feeling the tendency to repulsion underlies it,

for neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant feeling ignorance underlies it.”

-

“But for all pleasant feeling, Noble Lady, does the tendency to passion underlie it,

for all unpleasant feeling does the tendency to repulsion underlie it,

for all neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant feeling does the tendency to ignorance underlie it?”

“Not for all pleasant feeling, friend Visākha, does the tendency to passion underlie it,

not for all unpleasant feeling does the tendency to repulsion underlie it,

not for all neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant feeling does the tendency to ignorance underlie it.”

-

“But for all pleasant feeling, Noble Lady, what should be abandoned,

for all unpleasant feeling what should be abandoned,

for all neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant feeling what should be abandoned?”

“For pleasant feeling, friend Visākha, the tendency to passion should be abandoned,

for unpleasant feeling the tendency to repulsion should be abandoned,

for neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant feeling the tendency to ignorance should be abandoned.”

-

“But for all pleasant feeling, Noble Lady, (is there) a tendency to passion that should be abandoned,

for all unpleasant feeling (is there) a tendency to repulsion that should be abandoned,

for all neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant feeling (is there) a tendency to ignorance that should be abandoned?”

“Not for all pleasant feeling, friend Visākha, (is there) a tendency to passion that should be abandoned,

not for all unpleasant feeling (is there) a tendency to repulsion that should be abandoned,

not for all neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant feeling (is there) a tendency to ignorance that should be abandoned.

Here, friend Visākha, a monastic, quite secluded from sense desires, secluded from unwholesome things, having thinking, reflection, and the happiness and rapture born of seclusion, dwells having attained the first absorption.

- On that basis passion is abandoned, and herein there is no more underlying tendency to passion.

Here, friend Visākha, a monastic considers thus: ‘When will I dwell having attained that sphere that the Noble Ones now dwell in having attained that sphere?’ Thus a longing to give attendance towards that unsurpassed freedom arises and with longing as condition sorrow (arises).

- On that basis repulsion is abandoned, and herein there is no more underlying tendency to repulsion.

Here, friend Visākha, a monastic, having given up pleasure, given up pain, and with the previous disappearence of mental well-being and sorrow, without pain, without pleasure, and with complete purity of mindfulness owing to equanimity, dwells having attained the fourth absorption.

On that basis ignorance is abandoned, and herein there is no more underlying tendency to ignorance.”

-

“But for pleasant feeling, Noble Lady, what is the complement?”

“For pleasant feeling, friend Visākha, the complement is unpleasant feeling.”

-

“But for unpleasant feeling, Noble Lady, what is the complement?”

“For unpleasant feeling, friend Visākha, the complement is pleasant feeling.”

-

“But for neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant feeling, Noble Lady, what is the complement?”

“For neither-unpleasant-nor-pleasant feeling, friend Visākha, the complement is ignorance.”

-

“But for ignorance, Noble Lady, what is the complement?”

“For ignorance, friend Visākha, the complement is understanding.”

-

“But for understanding, Noble Lady, what is the complement?”

“For understanding, friend Visākha, the complement is freedom.”

-

“But for freedom, Noble Lady, what is the complement?”

“For freedom, friend Visākha, the complement is Nibbāna.”

-

“But for Nibbāna, Noble Lady, what is the complement?”

“You are not able to grasp, friend Visākha, answers to questions that are beyond your limits, like immersion in Nibbāna, friend Visākha, the spiritual life that ends in Nibbāna, that conclusion in Nibbāna.

Desiring this, friend Visākha, approach the Blessed One and you can ask him about this matter, and just as the Blessed One explains, so you should bear it in mind.”

-

Then the devotee Visākha, after greatly rejoicing and gladly receiving this word of the nun Dhammadinnā, having worshipped and circumambulated the nun Dhammadinnā, approached the Blessed One, and after approaching and worshipping the Blessed One, he sat down on one side. While sitting on one side the devotee Visākha related the whole conversation he had had with the nun Dhammadinnā to the Blessed One.

That being said, the Blessed One said this to the devotee Visākha: “Wise, Visākha, is the nun Dhammadinnā, having great wisdom, Visākha, is the nun Dhammadinnā, if you were to ask me, Visākha, the same matter, I would answer it in the same way, in the way the nun Dhammadinnā has answered, for this is indeed the meaning, and so should you bear it in mind.”

The Blessed One said this, and the devotee Visākha was uplifted and greatly rejoiced in what was said by the Blessed One.

The Lesser Series of Questions-and-Answers is Finished
