The Book of the Ones

I. Obsession of the Mind 1–10
II. Abandoning the Hindrances 11–20
III. Unwieldy 21–30
IV. Untamed 31–40
V. A Spike 41–50
VI. Luminous 51–60
VII. Arousal of Energy 61–70
VIII. Good Friendship 71–81
IX. Heedlessness 82–97
X. Internal 98–139
XI. Non-Dhamma 140–149
XII. Not an Offense 150–169
XIII. One Person 170–187
XIV. Foremost 188–267







XV. Impossible 268–295


XVI. One Thing 296–377



XVII. Qualities Engendering Confidence 378–393
XVIII. Finger Snap 394–574
XIX. Mindfulness Directed to the Body 575–615
XX. The Deathless 616–627

I. OBSESSION OF THE MIND
1 
Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was dwelling at Sāvatthī in Jeta’s Grove, Anāthapiṇḍika’s Park.
There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus: “Bhikkhus!”
“Venerable sir!” those bhikkhus replied.
The Blessed One said this:

“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other form that so obsesses the mind of a man as the form of a woman.
The form of a woman obsesses the mind of a man.” (1)

2 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other sound that so obsesses the mind of a man as the sound of a woman.
The sound of a woman obsesses the mind of a man.” (2)

3 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other odor that so obsesses the mind of a man as the odor of a woman.
The odor of a woman obsesses the mind of a man.” (3)

4 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other taste that so obsesses the mind of a man as the taste of a woman.
The taste of a woman obsesses the mind of a man.” (4)

5 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other touch that so obsesses the mind of a man as the touch of a woman.
The touch of a woman obsesses the mind of a man.” (5)

6 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other form that so obsesses the mind of a woman as the form of a man
The form of a man obsesses the mind of a woman.” (6)

7 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other sound that so obsesses the mind of a woman as the sound of a man.
The sound of a man obsesses the mind of a woman.” (7)

8 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other odor that so obsesses the mind of a woman as the odor of a man.
The odor of a man obsesses the mind of a woman.” (8)

9 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other taste that so obsesses the mind of a woman as the taste of a man.
The taste of a man obsesses the mind of a woman.” (9)

10 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other touch that so obsesses the mind of a woman as the touch of a man.
The touch of a man obsesses the mind of a woman.” (10)


II. ABANDONING THE HINDRANCES

11 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing on account of which unarisen sensual desire arises and arisen sensual desire increases and expands so much as the mark of the attractive.
For one who attends carelessly to the mark of the attractive, unarisen sensual desire arises and arisen sensual desire increases and expands.” (1)

12 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing on account of which unarisen ill will arises and arisen ill will increases and expands so much as the mark of the repulsive.
For one who attends carelessly to the mark of the repulsive, unarisen ill will arises and arisen ill will increases and expands.” (2)

13 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing on account of which unarisen dullness and drowsiness arise and arisen dullness and drowsiness increase and expand so much as discontent, lethargy, lazy stretching, drowsiness after meals, and sluggishness of mind.
For one with a sluggish mind, unarisen dullness and drowsiness arise and arisen dullness and drowsiness increase and expand.” (3)

14 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing on account of which unarisen restlessness and remorse arise and arisen restlessness and remorse increase and expand so much as an unsettled mind.
For one with an unsettled mind, unarisen restlessness and remorse arise and arisen restlessness and remorse increase and expand.” (4)

15 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing on account of which unarisen doubt arises and arisen doubt increases and expands so much as careless attention.
For one who attends carelessly, unarisen doubt arises and arisen doubt increases and expands.” (5)

16 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing on account of which unarisen sensual desire does not arise and arisen sensual desire is abandoned so much as the mark of the unattractive.
For one who attends carefully to the mark of the unattractive, unarisen sensual desire does not arise and arisen sensual desire is abandoned.” (6)

17 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing on account of which unarisen ill will does not arise and arisen ill will is abandoned so much as the liberation of the mind by loving-kindness.
For one who attends carefully to the liberation of the mind by loving-kindness, unarisen ill will does not arise and arisen ill will is abandoned.” (7)

18 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing on account of which unarisen dullness and drowsiness do not arise and arisen dullness and drowsiness are abandoned so much as the element of instigation, the element of persistence, the element of exertion.
For one who has aroused energy, unarisen dullness and drowsiness do not arise and arisen dullness and drowsiness are abandoned.” (8)

19 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing on account of which unarisen restlessness and remorse do not arise and arisen restlessness and remorse are abandoned so much as pacification of the mind.
For one with a pacified mind, unarisen restlessness and remorse do not arise and arisen restlessness and remorse are abandoned.” (9)

20 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing on account of which unarisen doubt does not arise and arisen doubt is abandoned so much as careful attention.
For one who attends carefully, unarisen doubt does not arise and arisen doubt is abandoned.” (10)


III. UNWIELDY

21 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that when undeveloped is so unwieldy as the mind.
An undeveloped mind is unwieldy.” (1)

22 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that when developed is so wieldy as the mind.
A developed mind is wieldy.” (2)

23 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that when undeveloped leads to such great harm as the mind.
An undeveloped mind leads to great harm.” (3)

24 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that when developed leads to such great good as the mind.
A developed mind leads to great good.” (4)

25 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that, when undeveloped and unmanifested, leads to such great harm as the mind.
The mind, when undeveloped and unmanifested, leads to great harm.” (5)

26 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that, when developed and manifested, leads to such great good as the mind.
The mind, when developed and manifested, leads to great good.” (6)

27 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that, when undeveloped and uncultivated, leads to such great harm as the mind.
The mind, when undeveloped and uncultivated, leads to great harm.” (7)

28 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads to such great good as the mind.
The mind, when developed and cultivated, leads to great good.” (8)

29 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that, when undeveloped and uncultivated, brings such suffering as the mind.
The mind, when undeveloped and uncultivated, brings suffering.” (9)

30 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that, when developed and cultivated, brings such happiness as the mind.
The mind, when developed and cultivated, brings happiness.” (10)


IV. UNTAMED

31 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that when untamed leads to such great harm as the mind.
An untamed mind leads to great harm.” (1)

32 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that when tamed leads to such great good as the mind.
A tamed mind leads to great good.” (2)

33 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that when unguarded leads to such great harm as the mind.
An unguarded mind leads to great harm.” (3)

34 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that when guarded leads to such great good as the mind.
A guarded mind leads to great good.” (4)

35 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that when unprotected leads to such great harm as the mind.
An unprotected mind leads to great harm.” (5)

36 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that when protected leads to such great good as the mind.
A protected mind leads to great good.” (6)

37 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that when unrestrained leads to such great harm as the mind.
An unrestrained mind leads to great harm.” (7)

38 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that when restrained leads to such great good as the mind.
A restrained mind leads to great good.” (8)

39 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that, when untamed, unguarded, unprotected, and unrestrained, leads to such great harm as the mind.
The mind, when untamed, unguarded, unprotected, and unrestrained, leads to great harm.” (9)

40 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that, when tamed, guarded, protected, and restrained, leads to such great good as the mind.
The mind, when tamed, guarded, protected, and restrained, leads to great good.” (10)


V. A SPIKE

41 
“Bhikkhus, suppose a misdirected spike of hill rice or barley were pressed by the hand or foot. It is impossible that it would pierce the hand or the foot and draw blood.
For what reason? Because the spike is misdirected.
So too, it is impossible that a bhikkhu with a misdirected mind would pierce ignorance, arouse true knowledge, and realize nibbāna.
For what reason? Because the mind is misdirected.” (1)

42 
“Bhikkhus, suppose a well-directed spike of hill rice or barley were pressed by the hand or foot. It is possible that it would pierce the hand or the foot and draw blood.
For what reason? Because the spike is well directed.
So too, it is possible that a bhikkhu with a well-directed mind would pierce ignorance, arouse true knowledge, and realize nibbāna.
For what reason? Because the mind is well directed.” (2)

43 
“Here, bhikkhus, having encompassed a mentally corrupted person’s mind with my own mind, I understand that if this person were to die at this time, he would be deposited in hell as if brought there.
For what reason? Because his mind is corrupted.
It is because of mental corruption that with the breakup of the body, after death, some beings here are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.” (3)

44 
“Here, bhikkhus, having encompassed a mentally placid person’s mind with my own mind, I understand that if this person were to die at this time, he would be deposited in heaven as if brought there.
For what reason? Because his mind is placid.
It is because of mental placidity that with the breakup of the body, after death, some beings here are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.” (4)

45 
“Bhikkhus, suppose there were a pool of water that was cloudy, turbid, and muddy.
Then a man with good sight standing on the bank could not see shells, gravel and pebbles, and shoals of fish swimming about and resting.
For what reason? Because the water is cloudy.
So too, it is impossible for a bhikkhu with a cloudy mind to know his own good, the good of others, or the good of both, or to realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.
For what reason? Because his mind is cloudy.” (5)

46 
“Bhikkhus, suppose there were a pool of water that was clear, serene, and limpid.
Then a man with good sight standing on the bank could see shells, gravel and pebbles, and shoals of fish swimming about and resting.
For what reason? Because the water is limpid.
So too, it is possible for a bhikkhu with a limpid mind to know his own good, the good of others, and the good of both, and to realize a superhuman distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones.
For what reason? Because his mind is limpid.” (6)

47 
“Bhikkhus, just as sandalwood is declared to be the best of trees with respect to malleability and wieldiness,
so too I do not see even one other thing that, when developed and cultivated, is so malleable and wieldy as the mind.
A developed and cultivated mind is malleable and wieldy.” (7)

48 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even one other thing that changes so quickly as the mind.
It is not easy to give a simile for how quickly the mind changes.” (8)

49 
“Luminous, bhikkhus, is this mind,
but it is defiled by adventitious defilements.” (9)

50 
“Luminous, bhikkhus, is this mind,
and it is freed from adventitious defilements.” (10)


VI. LUMINOUS

51 
“Luminous, bhikkhus, is this mind,
but it is defiled by adventitious defilements.
The uninstructed worldling does not understand this as it really is;
therefore I say that for the uninstructed worldling there is no development of the mind.” (1)

52 
“Luminous, bhikkhus, is this mind,
and it is freed from adventitious defilements.
The instructed noble disciple understands this as it really is;
therefore I say that for the instructed noble disciple there is development of the mind.” (2)

53 
“Bhikkhus, if for just the time of a finger snap a bhikkhu pursues a mind of loving-kindness,
he is called a bhikkhu who is not devoid of jhāna, who acts upon the teaching of the Teacher, who responds to his advice, and who does not eat the country’s almsfood in vain.
How much more, then, those who cultivate it!” (3)

54 
“Bhikkhus, if for just the time of a finger snap a bhikkhu develops a mind of loving-kindness,
he is called a bhikkhu who is not devoid of jhāna, who acts upon the teaching of the Teacher, who responds to his advice, and who does not eat the country’s almsfood in vain.
How much more, then, those who cultivate it!” (4)

55 
“Bhikkhus, if for just the time of a finger snap a bhikkhu attends to a mind of loving-kindness,
he is called a bhikkhu who is not devoid of jhāna, who acts upon the teaching of the Teacher, who responds to his advice, and who does not eat the country’s almsfood in vain.
How much more, then, those who cultivate it!” (5)

56 
“Bhikkhus, whatever qualities are unwholesome, partake of the unwholesome, and pertain to the unwholesome, all have the mind as their forerunner.
Mind arises first followed by the unwholesome qualities.” (6)

57 
“Bhikkhus, whatever qualities are wholesome, partake of the wholesome, and pertain to the wholesome, all have the mind as their forerunner.
Mind arises first followed by the wholesome qualities.” (7)

58 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see a single thing that so causes unarisen unwholesome qualities to arise and arisen wholesome qualities to decline as heedlessness.
For one who is heedless, unarisen unwholesome qualities arise and arisen wholesome qualities decline.” (8)

59 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see a single thing that so causes unarisen wholesome qualities to arise and arisen unwholesome qualities to decline as heedfulness.
For one who is heedful, unarisen wholesome qualities arise and arisen unwholesome qualities decline.” (9)

60 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see a single thing that so causes unarisen unwholesome qualities to arise and arisen wholesome qualities to decline as laziness.
For one who is lazy, unarisen unwholesome qualities arise and arisen wholesome qualities decline.” (10)


VII. AROUSAL OF ENERGY

61 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen wholesome qualities to arise and arisen unwholesome qualities to decline as arousal of energy.
For one who has aroused energy, unarisen wholesome qualities arise and arisen unwholesome qualities decline.” (1)

62 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen unwholesome qualities to arise and arisen wholesome qualities to decline as strong desire.
For one with strong desire, unarisen unwholesome qualities arise and arisen wholesome qualities decline.” (2)

63 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen wholesome qualities to arise and arisen unwholesome qualities to decline as fewness of desires.
For one with few desires, unarisen wholesome qualities arise and arisen unwholesome qualities decline.” (3)

64 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen unwholesome qualities to arise and arisen wholesome qualities to decline as non-contentment.
For one who is not content, unarisen unwholesome qualities arise and arisen wholesome qualities decline.” (4)

65 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen wholesome qualities to arise and arisen unwholesome qualities to decline as contentment.
For one who is content, unarisen wholesome qualities arise and arisen unwholesome qualities decline.” (5)

66 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen unwholesome qualities to arise and arisen wholesome qualities to decline as careless attention.
For one who attends carelessly, unarisen unwholesome qualities arise and arisen wholesome qualities decline.” (6)

67 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen wholesome qualities to arise and arisen unwholesome qualities to decline as careful attention.
For one who attends carefully, unarisen wholesome qualities arise and arisen unwholesome qualities decline.” (7)

68 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen unwholesome qualities to arise and arisen wholesome qualities to decline as lack of clear comprehension.
For one who does not clearly comprehend, unarisen unwholesome qualities arise and arisen wholesome qualities decline.” (8)

69 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen wholesome qualities to arise and arisen unwholesome qualities to decline as clear comprehension.
For one who clearly comprehends, unarisen wholesome qualities arise and arisen unwholesome qualities decline.” (9)

70 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen unwholesome qualities to arise and arisen wholesome qualities to decline as bad friendship.
For one with bad friends, unarisen unwholesome qualities arise and arisen wholesome qualities decline.” (10)


VIII. GOOD FRIENDSHIP

71 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen wholesome qualities to arise and arisen unwholesome qualities to decline as good friendship.
For one with good friends, unarisen wholesome qualities arise and arisen unwholesome qualities decline.” (1)

72 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen unwholesome qualities to arise and arisen wholesome qualities to decline as the pursuit of unwholesome qualities and the non-pursuit of wholesome qualities.
Through the pursuit of unwholesome qualities and the non-pursuit of wholesome qualities, unarisen unwholesome qualities arise and arisen wholesome qualities decline.” (2)

73 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen wholesome qualities to arise and arisen unwholesome qualities to decline as the pursuit of wholesome qualities and the non-pursuit of unwholesome qualities.
Through the pursuit of wholesome qualities and the non-pursuit of unwholesome qualities, unarisen wholesome qualities arise and arisen unwholesome qualities decline.” (3)

74 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen factors of enlightenment not to arise and arisen factors of enlightenment not to reach fulfillment by development as careless attention.
For one who attends carelessly, unarisen factors of enlightenment do not arise and arisen factors of enlightenment do not reach fulfillment by development.” (4)

75 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so causes unarisen factors of enlightenment to arise and arisen factors of enlightenment to reach fulfillment by development as careful attention.
For one who attends carefully, unarisen factors of enlightenment arise and arisen factors of enlightenment reach fulfillment by development.” (5)

76 
“Insignificant, bhikkhus, is the loss of relatives.
The worst thing to lose is wisdom.” (6)

77 
“Insignificant, bhikkhus, is the increase of relatives.
The best thing in which to increase is wisdom.
Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will increase in wisdom.’
It is in such a way that you should train yourselves.” (7)

78 
“Insignificant, bhikkhus, is the loss of wealth.
The worst thing to lose is wisdom.” (8)

79 
“Insignificant, bhikkhus, is the increase of wealth.
The best thing in which to increase is wisdom.
Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will increase in wisdom.’
It is in such a way that you should train yourselves.” (9)

80 
“Insignificant, bhikkhus, is the loss of fame.
The worst thing to lose is wisdom.” (10)


IX. HEEDLESSNESS

81 
“Insignificant, bhikkhus, is the increase of fame.
The best thing in which to increase is wisdom.
Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus: ‘We will increase in wisdom.’
It is in such a way that you should train yourselves.” (1)

82 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that leads to such great harm as heedlessness.
Heedlessness leads to great harm.” (2)

83 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that leads to such great good as heedfulness.
Heedfulness leads to great good.” (3)

84 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that leads to such great harm as laziness.
Laziness leads to great harm.” (4)

85 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that leads to such great good as arousal of energy.
Arousal of energy leads to great good.” (5)

86 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that leads to such great harm as strong desire.
Strong desire leads to great harm.” (6)

87 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that leads to such great good as fewness of desires.
Fewness of desires leads to great good.” (7)

88 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that leads to such great harm as non-contentment.
Non-contentment leads to great harm.” (8)

89 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that leads to such great good as contentment.
Contentment leads to great good.” (9)

90 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that leads to such great harm as careless attention.
Careless attention leads to great harm.” (10)

91 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that leads to such great good as careful attention.
Careful attention leads to great good.” (11)

92 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that leads to such great harm as lack of clear comprehension.
Lack of clear comprehension leads to great harm.” (12)

93 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that leads to such great good as clear comprehension.
Clear comprehension leads to great good.” (13)

94 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that leads to such great harm as bad friendship.
Bad friendship leads to great harm.” (14)

95 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that leads to such great good as good friendship.
Good friendship leads to great good.” (15)

96 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that leads to such great harm as the pursuit of unwholesome qualities and the non-pursuit of wholesome qualities.
The pursuit of unwholesome qualities and the non-pursuit of wholesome qualities leads to great harm.” (16)

97 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that leads to such great good as the pursuit of wholesome qualities and the non-pursuit of unwholesome qualities.
The pursuit of wholesome qualities and the non-pursuit of unwholesome qualities leads to great good.” (17)


X. INTERNAL

98 
“Among internal factors, bhikkhus, I do not see even a single factor that leads to such great harm as heedlessness.
Heedlessness leads to great harm.” (1)

99 
“Among internal factors, bhikkhus, I do not see even a single factor that leads to such great good as heedfulness.
Heedfulness leads to great good.” (2)

100 
“Among internal factors, bhikkhus, I do not see even a single factor that leads to such great harm as laziness.
Laziness leads to great harm.” (3)

101 
“Among internal factors, bhikkhus, I do not see even a single factor that leads to such great good as arousal of energy.
Arousal of energy leads to great good.” (4)

102 
“Among internal factors, bhikkhus, I do not see even a single factor that leads to such great harm as strong desire.
Strong desire leads to great harm.” (5)

103 
“Among internal factors, bhikkhus, I do not see even a single factor that leads to such great good as fewness of desires.
Fewness of desires leads to great good.” (6)

104 
“Among internal factors, bhikkhus, I do not see even a single factor that leads to such great harm as non-contentment.
Non-contentment leads to great harm.” (7)

105 
“Among internal factors, bhikkhus, I do not see even a single factor that leads to such great good as contentment.
Contentment leads to great good.” (8)

106 
“Among internal factors, bhikkhus, I do not see even a single factor that leads to such great harm as careless attention.
Careless attention leads to great harm.” (9)

107 
“Among internal factors, bhikkhus, I do not see even a single factor that leads to such great good as careful attention.
Careful attention leads to great good.” (10)

108 
“Among internal factors, bhikkhus, I do not see even a single factor that leads to such great harm as lack of clear comprehension.
Lack of clear comprehension leads to great harm.” (11)

109 
“Among internal factors, bhikkhus, I do not see even a single factor that leads to such great good as clear comprehension.
Clear comprehension leads to great good.” (12)

110 
“Among external factors, bhikkhus, I do not see even a single factor that leads to such great harm as bad friendship.
Bad friendship leads to great harm.” (13)

111 
“Among external factors, bhikkhus, I do not see even a single factor that leads to such great good as good friendship.
Good friendship leads to great good.” (14)

112 
“Among internal factors, bhikkhus, I do not see even a single factor that leads to such great harm as the pursuit of unwholesome qualities and the non-pursuit of wholesome qualities. 
The pursuit of unwholesome qualities and the non-pursuit of wholesome qualitiesleads to great harm.” (15)

113 
“Among internal factors, bhikkhus, I do not see even a single factor that leads to such great good as the pursuit of wholesome qualities and the non-pursuit of unwholesome qualities.
The pursuit of wholesome qualities and the non-pursuit of unwholesome qualities leads to great good.” (16)

114 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so leads to the decline and disappearance of the good Dhamma as heedlessness.
Heedlessness leads to the decline and disappearance of the good Dhamma.” (17)

115 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so leads to the continuation, non-decline, and non-disappearance of the good Dhamma as heedfulness.
Heedfulness leads to the continuation, non-decline, and non-disappearance of the good Dhamma.” (18)

116 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so leads to the decline and disappearance of the good Dhamma as laziness.
Laziness leads to the decline and disappearance of the good Dhamma.” (19)

117 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so leads to the continuation, non-decline, and non-disappearance of the good Dhamma as arousal of energy.
Arousal of energy leads the continuation, non-decline, and non-disappearance of the good Dhamma.” (20)

118 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so leads to the decline and disappearance of the good Dhamma as strong desire.
Strong desire leads to the decline and disappearance of the good Dhamma.” (21)

119 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so leads to the continuation, non-decline, and non-disappearance of the good Dhamma as fewness of desires.
Fewness of desires leads the continuation, non-decline, and non-disappearance of the good Dhamma.” (22)

120 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so leads to the decline and disappearance of the good Dhamma as non-contentment.
Non-contentment leads to the decline and disappearance of the good Dhamma.” (23)

121 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so leads to the continuation, non-decline, and non-disappearance of the good Dhamma as contentment.
Contentment leads the continuation, non-decline, and non-disappearance of the good Dhamma.” (24)

122 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so leads to the decline and disappearance of the good Dhamma as careless attention.
Careless attention leads to the decline and disappearance of the good Dhamma.” (25)

123 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so leads to the continuation, non-decline, and non-disappearance of the good Dhamma as careful attention.
Careful attention leads the continuation, non-decline, and non-disappearance of the good Dhamma.” (26)

124 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so leads to the decline and disappearance of the good Dhamma as lack of clear comprehension.
Lack of clear comprehension leads to the decline and disappearance of the good Dhamma.” (27)

125 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so leads to the continuation, non-decline, and non-disappearance of the good Dhamma as clear comprehension.
Clear comprehension leads the continuation, non-decline, and non-disappearance of the good Dhamma.” (28)

126 
“Among external factors, bhikkhus, I do not see even a single factor that leads to such great harm as bad friendship.
Bad friendship leads to the decline and disappearance of the good Dhamma.” (29)

127 
“Among external factors, bhikkhus, I do not see even a single factor that leads to such great good as good friendship.
Good friendship leads the continuation, non-decline, and non-disappearance of the good Dhamma.” (30)

128 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so leads to the decline and disappearance of the good Dhamma as the pursuit of unwholesome qualities and the non-pursuit of wholesome qualities. 
The pursuit of unwholesome qualities and the non-pursuit of wholesome qualitiesleads to the decline and disappearance of the good Dhamma.” (31)

129 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing that so leads to the continuation, non-decline, and non-disappearance of the good Dhamma as the pursuit of wholesome qualities and the non-pursuit of unwholesome qualities.
The pursuit of wholesome qualities and the non-pursuit of unwholesome qualities leads the continuation, non-decline, and non-disappearance of the good Dhamma.” (32)

130 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain non-Dhamma as Dhamma are acting for the harm of many people, the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much demerit and cause this good Dhamma to disappear.” (33)

131 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain Dhamma as non-Dhamma are acting for the harm of many people, the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much demerit and cause this good Dhamma to disappear.” (34)

132 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain non-discipline as discipline are acting for the harm of many people, the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much demerit and cause this good Dhamma to disappear.” (35)

133 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain discipline as non-discipline are acting for the harm of many people, the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much demerit and cause this good Dhamma to disappear.” (36)

134 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what has not been stated and uttered by the Tathāgata as having been stated and uttered by him are acting for the harm of many people, the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much demerit and cause this good Dhamma to disappear.” (37)

135 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what has been stated and uttered by the Tathāgata as not having been stated and uttered by him are acting for the harm of many people, the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much demerit and cause this good Dhamma to disappear.” (38)

136 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what has not been practiced by the Tathāgata as having been practiced by him are acting for the harm of many people, the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much demerit and cause this good Dhamma to disappear.” (39)

137 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what has been practiced by the Tathāgata as not having been practiced by him are acting for the harm of many people, the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much demerit and cause this good Dhamma to disappear.” (40)

138 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what has not been prescribed by the Tathāgata as having been prescribed by him are acting for the harm of many people, the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much demerit and cause this good Dhamma to disappear.” (41)

139 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what has been prescribed by the Tathāgata as not having been prescribed by him are acting for the harm of many people, for the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much demerit and cause this good Dhamma to disappear.” (42)


XI. NON-DHAMMA

140 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain non-Dhamma as non-Dhamma are acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much merit and sustain this good Dhamma.” (1)

141 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain Dhamma as Dhamma are acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much merit and sustain this good Dhamma.” (2)

142 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain non-discipline as non-discipline are acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much merit and sustain this good Dhamma.” (3)

143 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain discipline as discipline are acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much merit and sustain this good Dhamma.” (4)

144 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what has not been stated and uttered by the Tathāgata as not having been stated and uttered by him are acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much merit and sustain this good Dhamma.” (5)

145 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what has been stated and uttered by the Tathāgata as having been stated and uttered by him are acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much merit and sustain this good Dhamma.” (6)

146 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what has not been practiced by the Tathāgata as not having been practiced by him are acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much merit and sustain this good Dhamma.” (7)

147 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what has not been practiced by the Tathāgata as not having been practiced by him are acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much merit and sustain this good Dhamma.” (8)

148 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what has not been prescribed by the Tathāgata as not having been prescribed by him are acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much merit and sustain this good Dhamma.” (9)

149 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explainwhat has been prescribed by the Tathāgata as having been prescribed by him are acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much merit and sustain this good Dhamma.” (10)


XII. NOT AN OFFENSE

150 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what is not an offense as an offense are acting for the harm of many people, for the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much demerit and cause this good Dhamma to disappear.” (1)

151 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what is an offense as no offense are acting for the harm of many people, for the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much demerit and cause this good Dhamma to disappear.” (2)

152 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what is a light offense as a grave offense are acting for the harm of many people, for the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much demerit and cause this good Dhamma to disappear.” (3)

153 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what is a grave offense as a light offense are acting for the harm of many people, for the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much demerit and cause this good Dhamma to disappear.” (4)

154 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what is a coarse offense as not a coarse offense are acting for the harm of many people, for the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much demerit and cause this good Dhamma to disappear.” (5)

155 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what is an offense that is not coarse as a coarse offense are acting for the harm of many people, for the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much demerit and cause this good Dhamma to disappear.” (6)

156 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what is a remediable offense as an irremediable offense are acting for the harm of many people, for the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much demerit and cause this good Dhamma to disappear.” (7)

157 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what is an irremediable offense as a remediable offense are acting for the harm of many people, for the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much demerit and cause this good Dhamma to disappear.” (8)

158 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what is an offense with redress as an offense without redress are acting for the harm of many people, for the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much demerit and cause this good Dhamma to disappear.” (9)

159
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what is an offense without redress as an offense with redress are acting for the harm of many people, for the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
These bhikkhus generate much demerit and cause this good Dhamma to disappear.” (10)

160 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what is no offense as no offense are acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and humans.
These bhikkhus generate much merit and sustain this good Dhamma.” (11)

161 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain an offense as an offense are acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and humans.
These bhikkhus generate much merit and sustain this good Dhamma.” (12)

162 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what is a light offense as a light offense are acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and humans.
These bhikkhus generate much merit and sustain this good Dhamma.” (13)

163 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what is a grave offense as a grave offense are acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and humans.
These bhikkhus generate much merit and sustain this good Dhamma.” (14)

164 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what is a coarse offense as a coarse offense are acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and humans.
These bhikkhus generate much merit and sustain this good Dhamma.” (15)

165 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what is an offense that is not coarse as not a coarse offense are acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and humans.
These bhikkhus generate much merit and sustain this good Dhamma.” (16)

166 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what is a remediable offense as a remediable offense are acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and humans.
These bhikkhus generate much merit and sustain this good Dhamma.” (17)

167 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what is an irremediable offense as an irremediable offense are acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and humans.
These bhikkhus generate much merit and sustain this good Dhamma.” (18)

168 
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what is an offense with redress as an offense with redress are acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and humans.
These bhikkhus generate much merit and sustain this good Dhamma.” (19)

169
“Bhikkhus, those bhikkhus who explain what is an offense without redress as an offense without redress are acting for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and humans.
These bhikkhus generate much merit and sustain this good Dhamma.” (20)


XIII. ONE PERSON

170 
“Bhikkhus, there is one person who arises in the world for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, out of compassion for the world, for the good, welfare, and happiness of devas and human beings.
Who is that one person?
The Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
This is that one person who arises in the world for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, out of compassion for the world, for the good, welfare, and happiness of devas and human beings.”

171 
“Bhikkhus, the manifestation of one person is rare in the world.
Who is that one person?
The Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
This is the manifestation of one person that is rare in the world.”

172 
“Bhikkhus, there is one person arising in the world who is extraordinary.
Who is that one person?
The Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
This is one person arising in the world who is extraordinary.”

173 
“Bhikkhus, the death of one person is lamented by many people.
Who is that one person?
The Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
This is the death of one person that is lamented by many people.”

174 
“Bhikkhus, there is one person arising in the world who is unique, without a peer, without counterpart, incomparable, matchless, unrivaled, unequaled, without equal, the foremost of bipeds.
Who is that one person?
The Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
This is that one person arising in the world who is unique, without a peer, without counterpart, incomparable, matchless, unrivaled, unequaled, without equal, the foremost of bipeds.”

175 
“Bhikkhus, the manifestation of one person is the manifestation of great vision.
Who is that one person?
The Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
This is that one person whose manifestation is the manifestation of great vision.

176 
“Bhikkhus, the manifestation of one person is the manifestation of great light.
Who is that one person?
The Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
This is that one person whose manifestation is the manifestation of great light.

177 
“Bhikkhus, the manifestation of one person is the manifestation of great radiance.
Who is that one person?
The Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
This is that one person whose manifestation is the manifestation of great radiance.

178 
“Bhikkhus, the manifestation of one person is the manifestation of the six things unsurpassed.
Who is that one person?
The Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
This is that one person whose manifestation is the manifestation of the six things unsurpassed.

179 
“Bhikkhus, the manifestation of one person is the realization of the four analytical knowledges.
Who is that one person?
The Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
This is that one person whose manifestation is the realization of the four analytical knowledges.

180 
“Bhikkhus, the manifestation of one person is the penetration of numerous elements.
Who is that one person?
The Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
This is that one person whose manifestation is the penetration of numerous elements.

181 
“Bhikkhus, the manifestation of one person is the penetration of the diversity of elements.
Who is that one person?
The Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
This is that one person whose manifestation is the penetration of the diversity of elements.

182 
“Bhikkhus, the manifestation of one person is the realization of the fruit of true knowledge and liberation.
Who is that one person?
The Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
This is that one person whose manifestation is the realization of the fruit of true knowledge and liberation.

183 
“Bhikkhus, the manifestation of one person is the realization of the fruit of stream-entry.
Who is that one person?
The Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
This is that one person whose manifestation is the realization of the fruit of stream-entry.

184 
“Bhikkhus, the manifestation of one person is the realization of the fruit of once-returning.
Who is that one person?
The Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
This is that one person whose manifestation is the realization of the fruit of once-returning.

185 
“Bhikkhus, the manifestation of one person is the realization of the fruit of non-returning.
Who is that one person?
The Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
This is that one person whose manifestation is the realization of the fruit of non-returning.

186 
“Bhikkhus, the manifestation of one person is the manifestation of great vision.
Who is that one person?
The Tathāgata, the Arahant, the Perfectly Enlightened One.
This is that one person whose manifestation is the manifestation of great vision.

187 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single person who properly continues to keep in motion the unsurpassed wheel of the Dhamma set in motion by the Tathāgata as does Sāriputta.
Sāriputta properly continues to keep in motion the unsurpassed wheel of the Dhamma set in motion by the Tathāgata.” 


XIV. FOREMOST
i. First Subchapter

188
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples in seniority is Aññākoṇḍañña.”
189
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those with great wisdom is Sāriputta.”
190
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those with psychic potency is Mahāmoggallāna.”
191
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who expound the ascetic practices is Mahākassapa.”
192
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those with the divine eye is Anuruddha.”
193
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those from eminent families is Bhaddiya Kāḷigodhāyaputta.”
194
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those with a sweet voice is Lakuṇṭaka Bhaddiya.”
195
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those with the lion’s roar is Piṇḍola Bhāradvāja.”
196
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who speak on the Dhamma is Puṇṇa Mantāṇiputta.”
197
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who explain in detail the meaning of what has been stated in brief is Mahākaccāna.”


ii. Second Subchapter

198
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who create a mind-made body is Cullapanthaka.”
199
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those skilled in mental transformation is Cullapanthaka.”
200
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those skilled in the transformation of perception is Mahāpanthaka.”
201
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who dwell without conflict is Subhūti.”
202
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those worthy of gifts is Subhūti.”
203
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among forest dwellers is Revata Khadiravaniya.”
204
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among meditators is Kaṅkhārevata.”
205
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who arouse energy is Soṇa Koḷivīsa.”
206
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who are excellent speakers is Soṇa Kuṭikaṇṇa.”
207
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who make gains is Sīvalī.”
208
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those resolved through faith is Vakkalī.”


iii. Third Subchapter

209
1–218 10 209 “Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who desire the training is Rāhula.”
210
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who have gone forth out of faith is Raṭṭhapāla.”
211
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who are first to take meal tickets is Kuṇḍadhāna.”
212
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who compose inspired verse is Vaṅgīsa.”
213
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who inspire confidence in all respects is Upasena Vaṅgantaputta.”
214
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who assign lodgings is Dabba Mallaputta.”
215
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those pleasing and agreeable to the deities is Piḷindavaccha.”
216
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who quickly attain direct knowledge is Bāhiya Dārucīriya.”
217
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those with variegated speech is Kumārakassapa.”
218
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who have attained the analytical knowledges is Mahākoṭṭhita.”


iv. Fourth Subchapter

219
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who are learned is Ānanda.”
220
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those with good memory is Ānanda.”
221
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those with a quick grasp is Ānanda.”
222
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who are resolute is Ānanda.”
223
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among personal attendants is Ānanda.”
224
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those with a large retinue is Uruvelakassapa.”
225
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who inspire confidence in families is Kāludāyi.”
226
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those with good health is Bakkula.”
227
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who recollect past lives is Sobhita.”
228
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among the upholders of the discipline is Upāli.”
229
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who exhort bhikkhunīs is Nandaka.”
230
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who guard the doors of the sense faculties is Nanda.”
231
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who exhort bhikkhus is Mahākappina.”
232
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those with skill with the fire element is Sāgata.”
233
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who receive eloquent discourses is Rādha.”
234
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhu disciples among those who wear coarse robes is Mogharājā.”


v. Fifth Subchapter

235
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhunī disciples in seniority is Mahāpajāpatī Gotamī.”
236
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhunī disciples among those with great wisdom is Khemā.”
237
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhunī disciples among those with psychic potency is Uppalavaṇṇā.”
238
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhunī disciples among those who uphold the discipline is Paṭācārā.”
239
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhunī disciples among speakers on the Dhamma is Dhammadinnā.”
240
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhunī disciples among meditators is Nandā.”
241
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhunī disciples among those who arouse energy is Soṇā.”
242
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhunī disciples among those with the divine eye is Sakulā.”
243
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhunī disciples among those who quickly attain direct knowledge is Bhaddā Kuṇḍalakesā.”
244
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhunī disciples among those who recollect past lives is Bhaddā Kāpilānī.”
245
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhunī disciples among those who attain great direct knowledge is Bhaddā Kaccānā.”
246
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhunī disciples among those who wear coarse robes is Kisāgotamī.”
247
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my bhikkhunī disciples among those resolved through faith is Sigālamātā.”


vi. Sixth Subchapter

248
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my male lay followers in being the first to go for refuge are the merchants Tapussa and Bhallika.”
249
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my male lay followers among donors is the householder Sudatta Anāthapiṇḍika.”
250
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my male lay followers among speakers on the Dhamma is the householder Citta of Macchikāsaṇḍa.”
251
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my male lay followers among those who make use of the four means of attracting and sustaining others is Hatthaka of Āḷavī.”
252
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my male lay followers among those who give what is excellent is Mahānāma the Sakyan.”
253
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my male lay followers among those who give what is agreeable is the householder Ugga of Vesālī.”
254
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my male lay followers among attendants of the Saṅgha is the householder Uggata.”
255
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my male lay followers among those with unwavering confidence is Sūra Ambaṭṭha.”
256
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my male lay followers among those with confidence in persons is Jīvaka Komārabhacca.”
257
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my male lay followers among those who have trust is the householder Nakulapitā.”


vii. Seventh Subchapter

258
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my female lay followers in being the first to go for refuge is Sujātā, daughter of Senānī.”
259
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my female lay followers among donors is Visākhā Migāramātā.”
260
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my female lay followers among those who are learned is Khujjuttarā.”
261
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my female lay followers among those who dwell in loving-kindness is Sāmāvatī.”
262
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my female lay followers among meditators is Uttarā Nandamātā.”
263
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my female lay followers among those who give what is excellent is Suppavāsā the Koliyan daughter.”
264
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my female lay followers among those who attend on the sick is the female lay follower Suppiyā.”
265
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my female lay followers among those with unwavering confidence is Kātiyānī.”
266
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my female lay followers among those who are intimate is the housewife Nakulamātā.”
267
“Bhikkhus, the foremost of my female lay followers among those whose confidence is based on hearsay is the female lay follower Kāḷī of Kuraraghara.”



XV. IMPOSSIBLE

268 
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a person accomplished in view could consider any conditioned phenomenon as permanent;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that a worldling might consider some conditioned phenomenon as permanent;
there is such a possibility.”

269 
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a person accomplished in view could consider any conditioned phenomenon as pleasurable;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that a worldling might consider some conditioned phenomenon as pleasurable;
there is such a possibility.”

270 
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a person accomplished in view could consider anything as a self;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that a worldling might consider something as a self;
there is such a possibility.”

271 
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a person accomplished in view could deprive his mother of life;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that a worldling might deprive his mother of life;
there is such a possibility.”

272 
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a person accomplished in view could deprive his father of life;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that a worldling might deprive his father of life;
there is such a possibility.”

273 
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a person accomplished in view could deprive his arahant of life;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that a worldling might deprive his arahant of life;
there is such a possibility.”

274 
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a person accomplished in view could, with a mind of hatred, shed the blood of the Tathāgatha;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that a worldling might, with a mind of hatred, shed the blood of the Tathāgatha;
there is such a possibility.”

275 
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a person accomplished in view could create a schism in the Saṅgha;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that a worldling might create a schism in the Saṅgha;
there is such a possibility.”

276
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a person accomplished in view could acknowledge someone other [than the Buddha] as teacher;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that a worldling could acknowledge someone other [than the Buddha] as teacher;
there is such a possibility.”

277 
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that two arahants who are perfectly enlightened Buddhas could arise contemporaneously in one world system;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that one arahant who is a perfectly enlightened Buddha might arise in one world system;
there is such a possibility.”

278 
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that two wheel-turning monarchs could arise contemporaneously in one world system;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that one wheel-turning monarch might arise in one world system;
there is such a possibility.”

279 
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a woman could be an arahant who is a perfectly enlightened Buddha;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that a man could be an arahant who is a perfectly enlightened Buddha;
there is such a possibility.”

280 
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a woman could be a wheel-turning monarch;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that a man could be a wheel-turning monarch;
there is such a possibility.”

281 
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a woman could occupy the position of Sakka;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that a man could occupy the position of Sakka;
there is such a possibility.”

282 
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a woman could occupy the position of Māra;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that a man could occupy the position of Māra;
there is such a possibility.”

283
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a woman could occupy the position of Brahmā;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that a man could occupy the position of Brahmā;
there is such a possibility.”

284
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a wished for, desired, agreeable result could be produced from bodily misconduct;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that an unwished for, undesired, disagreeable result might be produced from bodily misconduct;
there is such a possibility.”

285
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a wished for, desired, agreeable result could be produced from verbal misconduct;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that an unwished for, undesired, disagreeable result might be produced from verbal misconduct;
there is such a possibility.”

286
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a wished for, desired, agreeable result could be produced from mental misconduct;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that an unwished for, undesired, disagreeable result might be produced from mental misconduct;
there is such a possibility.”




287
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that an unwished for, undesired, disagreeable result could be produced from bodily good conduct;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that a wished for, desired, agreeable result could be produced from bodily good conduct;
there is such a possibility.”

288
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that an unwished for, undesired, disagreeable result could be produced from verbal good conduct;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that a wished for, desired, agreeable result could be produced from verbal good conduct;
there is such a possibility.”

289
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that an unwished for, undesired, disagreeable result could be produced from mental good conduct;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that a wished for, desired, agreeable result could be produced from mental good conduct;
there is such a possibility.”

290
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a person engaging in bodily misconduct could on that account, for that reason, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that a person engaging in bodily misconduct could on that account, for that reason, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell;
there is such a possibility.”

291
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a person engaging in verbal misconduct could on that account, for that reason, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that a person engaging in verbal misconduct could on that account, for that reason, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell;
there is such a possibility.”

292
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a person engaging in mental misconduct could on that account, for that reason, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that a person engaging in mental misconduct could on that account, for that reason, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell;
there is such a possibility.”

293
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a person engaging in bodily good conduct could on that account, for that reason, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that a person engaging in bodily good conduct could on that account, for that reason, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world;
there is such a possibility.”

294
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a person engaging in verbal good conduct could on that account, for that reason, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that a person engaging in verbal good conduct could on that account, for that reason, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world;
there is such a possibility.”

295
“It is impossible and inconceivable, bhikkhus, that a person engaging in mental good conduct could on that account, for that reason, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell;
there is no such possibility.
But it is possible that a person engaging in mental good conduct could on that account, for that reason, with the breakup of the body, after death, be reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world;
there is such a possibility.”



XVI. ONE THING

i. First Subchapter

296 
“Bhikkhus, there is one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna.
What is that one thing?
Recollection of the Buddha.
This is that one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna.”

297 
“Bhikkhus, there is one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna.
What is that one thing?
Recollection of the Dhamma.
This is that one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna.”

298 
“Bhikkhus, there is one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna.
What is that one thing?
Recollection of the Saṅgha.
This is that one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna.”

299 
“Bhikkhus, there is one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna.
What is that one thing?
Recollection of virtuous behavior.
This is that one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna.”

300 
“Bhikkhus, there is one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna.
What is that one thing?
Recollection of generosity.
This is that one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna.”

301 
“Bhikkhus, there is one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna.
What is that one thing?
Recollection of the devas.
This is that one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna.”

302 
“Bhikkhus, there is one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna.
What is that one thing?
Mindfulness of breathing.
This is that one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna.”

303 
“Bhikkhus, there is one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna.
What is that one thing?
Mindfulness of death.
This is that one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna.”

304 
“Bhikkhus, there is one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna.
What is that one thing?
Mindfulness directed to the body.
This is that one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna.”

305 
“Bhikkhus, there is one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna.
What is that one thing?
Recollection of peace.
This is that one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbāna.”


ii. Second Subchapter

306 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing on account of which unarisen unwholesome qualities arise and arisen unwholesome qualities increase and expand so much as wrong view.
For one of wrong view, unarisen unwholesome qualities arise and arisen unwholesome qualities increase and expand.”

307 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing on account of which unarisen wholesome qualities arise and arisen wholesome qualities increase and expand so much as right view.
For one of right view, unarisen wholesome qualities arise and arisen wholesome qualities increase and expand.”

308 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing on account of which unarisen wholesome qualities do not arise and arisen wholesome qualities decline so much as wrong view.
For one of wrong view, unarisen wholesome qualities do not arise and arisen wholesome qualities decline.”

309 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing on account of which unarisen unwholesome qualities do not arise and arisen unwholesome qualities decline so much as right view.
For one of right view, unarisen unwholesome qualities do not arise and arisen unwholesome qualities decline.”

310 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing on account of which unarisen wrong view arises and arisen wrong view increases so much as careless attention.
For one of careless attention, unarisen wrong view arises and arisen wrong view increases.”

311 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing on account of which unarisen right view arises and arisen right view increases so much as careful attention.
For one of careful attention, unarisen right view arises and arisen right view increases.”

312 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing on account of which, with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell, so much as wrong view.
Possessing wrong view, with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in the plane of misery, in a bad destination, in the lower world, in hell.”

313 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing on account of which, with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world, so much as right view.
Possessing right view, with the breakup of the body, after death, beings are reborn in a good destination, in a heavenly world.”

314 
“Bhikkhus, for a person of wrong view, whatever bodily kamma, verbal kamma, and mental kamma he instigates and undertakes in accordance with that view,
and whatever his volition, yearning, inclination, and volitional activities, all lead to what is unwished for, undesired, and disagreeable, to harm and suffering.
For what reason?
Because the view is bad.

“Suppose, bhikkhus, a seed of neem, bitter cucumber, or bitter gourd were planted in moist soil.
Whatever nutrients it takes up from the soil and from the water would all lead to its bitter, pungent, and disagreeable flavor.
For what reason?
Because the seed is bad.
So too, for a person of wrong view, whatever bodily kamma, verbal kamma, and mental kamma he instigates and undertakes in accordance with that view,
and whatever his volition, yearning, inclination, and volitional activities, all lead to what is unwished for, undesired, and disagreeable, to harm and suffering.
For what reason?
Because the view is bad.”

315 
“Bhikkhus, for a person of right view, whatever bodily kamma, verbal kamma, and mental kamma he instigates and undertakes in accordance with that view,
and whatever his volition, yearning, inclination, and volitional activities, all lead to what is wished for, desired, and agreeable, to well-being and happiness.
For what reason?
Because the view is good.
“Suppose, bhikkhus, a seed of sugar cane, hill rice, or grape were planted in moist soil.  
Whatever nutrients it takes up from the soil and from the water would all lead to its sweet, agreeable, and delectable flavor.
For what reason?
Because the seed is good.
So too, for a person of right view, whatever bodily kamma, verbal kamma, and mental kamma he instigates and undertakes in accordance with that view,
and whatever his volition, yearning, inclination, and volitional activities, all lead to what is wished for, desired, and agreeable, to welfare and happiness.
For what reason?
Because the view is good.”


iii. Third Subchapter

316 
“Bhikkhus, there is one person who arises in the world for the harm of many people, for the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.
Who is that one person?
It is one who holds wrong view and has an incorrect perspective.
He draws many people away from the good Dhamma and establishes them in a bad Dhamma.
This is that one person who arises in the world for the harm of many people, the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings.”

317 
“Bhikkhus, there is one person who arises in the world for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and human beings.
Who is that one person?
It is one who holds right view and has a correct perspective.
He draws many people away from a bad Dhamma and establishes them in the good Dhamma.
This is that one person who arises in the world for the welfare of many people, for the happiness of many people, for the good, welfare, and happiness of many people, of devas and human beings.”

318 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single thing so blameworthy as wrong view.
Wrong view is the worst of things that are blameworthy.”

319 
“Bhikkhus, I do not see even a single person who is acting so much for the harm of many people, the unhappiness of many people, for the ruin, harm, and suffering of many people, of devas and human beings, as the hollow man Makkhali.
Just as a trap set at the mouth of a river would bring about harm, suffering, calamity, and disaster for many fish,
so too, the hollow man Makkhali is, as it were, a ‘trap for people’ who has arisen in the world for the harm, suffering, calamity, and disaster of many beings.”

320 
“Bhikkhus, one who encourages [others] in a badly expounded Dhamma and discipline, and the one whom he encourages, and the one who, thus encouraged, practices in accordance with it, all generate much demerit.
For what reason?
Because that Dhamma is badly expounded.”

321 
“Bhikkhus, one who encourages [others] in a well-expounded Dhamma and discipline, and the one whom he encourages, and the one who, thus encouraged, practices in accordance with it, all generate much merit.
For what reason?
Because that Dhamma is well expounded.”

322 
“Bhikkhus, with a badly expounded Dhamma and discipline, moderation should be known by the giver [of a gift], not by the recipient.
For what reason?
Because that Dhamma is badly expounded.”

323 
“Bhikkhus, with a well-expounded Dhamma and discipline, moderation should be known by the recipient [of a gift], not by the giver.
For what reason?
Because that Dhamma is well expounded.”

324 
“Bhikkhus, whoever arouses energy in a badly expounded Dhamma and discipline dwells in suffering.
For what reason?
Because that Dhamma is badly expounded.”

325 
“Bhikkhus, whoever is lazy in a well-expounded Dhamma and discipline dwells in suffering.
For what reason?
Because that Dhamma is well expounded.”

326 
“Bhikkhus, whoever is lazy in a badly expounded Dhamma and discipline dwells in happiness.
For what reason?
Because that Dhamma is badly expounded.”

327 
“Bhikkhus, whoever arouses energy in a well-expounded Dhamma and discipline dwells in happiness.
For what reason?
Because that Dhamma is well expounded.”

328 
“Bhikkhus, just as even a trifling amount of feces is foul smelling,
so too I do not praise even a trifling amount of existence, even for a mere finger snap.”

329 
“Bhikkhus, just as even a trifling amount of urine is foul smelling,
so too I do not praise even a trifling amount of existence, even for a mere finger snap.”

330 
“Bhikkhus, just as even a trifling amount of saliva is foul smelling,
so too I do not praise even a trifling amount of existence, even for a mere finger snap.”

331 
“Bhikkhus, just as even a trifling amount of pus is foul smelling,
so too I do not praise even a trifling amount of existence, even for a mere finger snap.”

332 
“Bhikkhus, just as even a trifling amount of blood is foul smelling,
so too I do not praise even a trifling amount of existence, even for a mere finger snap.”


iv. Jambudīpa Repetition Series [Fourth Subchapter]

333
“Just as, bhikkhus, in this Jambudīpa, delightful parks, groves, landscapes, and lotus ponds are few,
while more numerous are the hills and slopes, rivers that are hard to cross, places with stumps and thorns, and rugged mountains,
so too those beings are few who are born on dry ground;
more numerous are those beings who are born in water.”

334 “...
so too those beings are few who are reborn among human beings;
more numerous are those beings who have been reborn elsewhere than among human beings.”

335 “...
so too those beings are few who are reborn in the middle provinces;
more numerous are those who have been reborn in the outlying provinces among the uncouth foreigners.”

336 “...
so too those beings are few who are wise, intelligent, astute, able to understand the meaning of what has been well stated and badly stated;
more numerous are those who are unwise, stupid, obtuse, unable to understand the meaning of what has been well stated and badly stated.”

337 “...
so too those beings are few who are endowed with the noble eye of wisdom;
more numerous are those beings who are confused and immersed in ignorance.”

338 “...
so too those beings are few who get to see the Tathāgata;
more numerous are those beings who do not get to see him.”

339 “...
so too those beings are few who get to hear the Dhamma and discipline expounded by the Tathāgata;
more numerous are those who do not get to hear it.”

340 “...
so too those beings are few who, having heard the Dhamma, retain it in mind;
more numerous are those who, having heard the Dhamma, do not retain it in mind.”

341 “...
so too those beings are few who examine the meaning of the teachings that have been retained in mind;
more numerous are those who do not examine the meaning of the teachings that have been retained in mind.”

342 “...
so too those beings are few who understand the meaning and the Dhamma and then practice in accordance with the Dhamma;
more numerous are those who do not understand the meaning and the Dhamma and do not practice in accordance with the Dhamma.”

343 “...
so too those beings are few who acquire a sense of urgency about things inspiring urgency;
more numerous are those who do not acquire a sense of urgency about things inspiring urgency.”

344 “...
so too those beings are few who, when inspired with a sense of urgency, strive carefully;
more numerous are those who, when inspired with a sense of urgency, do not strive carefully.”

345 “...
so too those beings are few who gain concentration, one-pointedness of mind, based on release;
more numerous are those who do not gain concentration, one-pointedness of mind, based on release.”

346 “...
so too those beings are few who obtain the exquisite taste of delicious food;
more numerous are those who do not gain such food but subsist on scraps brought in a bowl.”

347 “...
so too those beings are few who obtain the taste of the meaning, the taste of the Dhamma, the taste of liberation;
more numerous are those who do not obtain the taste of the meaning, the taste of the Dhamma, the taste of liberation.
Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus:
‘We will obtain the taste of the meaning, the taste of the Dhamma, the taste of liberation.’
It is in such a way that you should train yourselves.”

348
“Just as, bhikkhus, in this Jambudīpa delightful parks, groves, landscapes, and lotus ponds are few,
while more numerous are the hills and slopes, rivers that are hard to cross, places with stumps and thorns, and rugged mountains,
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away as human beings, are reborn among human beings.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away as human beings, are reborn in hell.”

349
“Just as, bhikkhus, in this Jambudīpa delightful parks, groves, landscapes, and lotus ponds are few,
while more numerous are the hills and slopes, rivers that are hard to cross, places with stumps and thorns, and rugged mountains,
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away as human beings, are reborn among human beings.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away as human beings, are reborn in the animal realm.”

350
“Just as, bhikkhus, in this Jambudīpa delightful parks, groves, landscapes, and lotus ponds are few,
while more numerous are the hills and slopes, rivers that are hard to cross, places with stumps and thorns, and rugged mountains,
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away as human beings, are reborn among human beings.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away as human beings, are reborn in the sphere of afflicted spirits.”

351 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away as human beings, are reborn among the devas.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away as human beings, are reborn in hell.

352 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away as human beings, are reborn among the devas.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away as human beings, are reborn in the animal realm.”

353 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away as human beings, are reborn among the devas.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away as human beings, are reborn in the sphere of afflicted spirits.”

354 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away as devas, are reborn among the devas.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away as devas, are reborn in hell.”

355 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away as devas, are reborn among the devas.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away as devas, are reborn in the animal realm.”

356 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away as devas, are reborn among the devas.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away as devas, are reborn in the sphere of afflicted spirits.”

357 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away as devas, are reborn among human beings.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away as devas, are reborn in hell.”

358 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away as devas, are reborn among human beings.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away as devas, are reborn in the animal realm.”

359 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away as devas, are reborn among human beings.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away as devas, are reborn in the sphere of afflicted spirits.”

360 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away from hell, are reborn among human beings.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away from hell, are reborn in hell.”

361 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away from hell, are reborn among human beings.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away from hell, are reborn in the animal realm.”

362 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away from hell, are reborn among human beings.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away from hell, are reborn in the sphere of afflicted spirits.”

363 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away from hell, are reborn among the devas.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away from hell, are reborn in hell.”

364 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away from hell, are reborn among the devas.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away from hell, are reborn in the animal realm.”

365 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away from hell, are reborn among the devas.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away from hell, are reborn in the sphere of afflicted spirits.”

366 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away from the animal realm, are reborn among human beings.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away from the animal realm, are reborn in hell.”

367 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away from the animal realm, are reborn among human beings.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away from the animal realm, are reborn in the animal realm.”

368 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away from the animal realm, are reborn among human beings.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away from the animal realm, are reborn in the sphere of afflicted spirits.”

369 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away from the animal realm, are reborn among the devas.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away from the animal realm, are reborn in hell.”

369 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away from the animal realm, are reborn among the devas.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away from the animal realm, are reborn in the animal realm.”

369 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away from the animal realm, are reborn among the devas.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away from the animal realm, are reborn in the sphere of afflicted spirits.”

372 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away from the sphere of afflicted spirits, are reborn among human beings.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away from the sphere of afflicted spirits, are reborn in hell.”

373 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away from the sphere of afflicted spirits, are reborn among human beings.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away from the sphere of afflicted spirits, are reborn in the animal realm.”

374 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away from the sphere of afflicted spirits, are reborn among human beings.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away from the sphere of afflicted spirits, are reborn in the sphere of afflicted spirits.”

375 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away from the sphere of afflicted spirits, are reborn among the devas.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away from the sphere of afflicted spirits, are reborn in hell.”

376 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away from the sphere of afflicted spirits, are reborn among the devas.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away from the sphere of afflicted spirits, are reborn in the animal realm.”

377 “...
so too those beings are few who, when they pass away from the sphere of afflicted spirits, are reborn among the devas.
More numerous are those who, when they pass away from the sphere of afflicted spirits, are reborn in the sphere of afflicted spirits.”




XVII. QUALITIES ENGENDERING CONFIDENCE

378
“Bhikkhus, this is certainly a type of gain, namely, being a forest-dweller.”
379
“Bhikkhus, this is certainly a type of gain, namely, being one who lives on food acquired on alms round.”
380
“Bhikkhus, this is certainly a type of gain, namely, being a wearer of rag robes.”
381
“Bhikkhus, this is certainly a type of gain, namely, having just three robes.”
382
“Bhikkhus, this is certainly a type of gain, namely, being a speaker on the Dhamma.”
383
“Bhikkhus, this is certainly a type of gain, namely, being an upholder of the discipline.”
384
“Bhikkhus, this is certainly a type of gain, namely, great learning.”
385
“Bhikkhus, this is certainly a type of gain, namely, long-standing.”
386
“Bhikkhus, this is certainly a type of gain, namely, having proper deportment.”
387
“Bhikkhus, this is certainly a type of gain, namely, the acquisition of a retinue.”
388
“Bhikkhus, this is certainly a type of gain, namely, having a large retinue.”
389
“Bhikkhus, this is certainly a type of gain, namely, coming from a good family.”
390
“Bhikkhus, this is certainly a type of gain, namely, being handsome.”
391
“Bhikkhus, this is certainly a type of gain, namely, being an excellent speaker.”
392
“Bhikkhus, this is certainly a type of gain, namely, having few desires.”
393
“Bhikkhus, this is certainly a type of gain, namely, having good health.”



XVIII. FINGER SNAP

394 
“Bhikkhus, if for just the time of a finger snap a bhikkhu develops the first jhāna,
he is called
a bhikkhu who is not devoid of jhāna, who acts upon the teaching of the Teacher, who responds to his advice, and who does not eat the country’s almsfood in vain.
How much more, then, those who cultivate it!”

395 
“Bhikkhus, if for just the time of a finger snap a bhikkhu develops the second jhāna,
he is called
a bhikkhu who is not devoid of jhāna, who acts upon the teaching of the Teacher, who responds to his advice, and who does not eat the country’s almsfood in vain.
How much more, then, those who cultivate it!”

396 
“Bhikkhus, if for just the time of a finger snap a bhikkhu develops the third jhāna,
he is called
a bhikkhu who is not devoid of jhāna, who acts upon the teaching of the Teacher, who responds to his advice, and who does not eat the country’s almsfood in vain.
How much more, then, those who cultivate it!”

397 
“Bhikkhus, if for just the time of a finger snap a bhikkhu develops the fourth jhāna,
he is called
a bhikkhu who is not devoid of jhāna, who acts upon the teaching of the Teacher, who responds to his advice, and who does not eat the country’s almsfood in vain.
How much more, then, those who cultivate it!”

398 
“Bhikkhus, if for just the time of a finger snap a bhikkhu develops the liberation of the mind by loving-kindness,
he is called
a bhikkhu who is not devoid of jhāna, who acts upon the teaching of the Teacher, who responds to his advice, and who does not eat the country’s almsfood in vain.
How much more, then, those who cultivate it!”

399 
“Bhikkhus, if for just the time of a finger snap a bhikkhu develops the liberation of the mind by compassion,
he is called
a bhikkhu who is not devoid of jhāna, who acts upon the teaching of the Teacher, who responds to his advice, and who does not eat the country’s almsfood in vain.
How much more, then, those who cultivate it!”

400 
“Bhikkhus, if for just the time of a finger snap a bhikkhu develops the liberation of the mind by altruistic joy,
he is called
a bhikkhu who is not devoid of jhāna, who acts upon the teaching of the Teacher, who responds to his advice, and who does not eat the country’s almsfood in vain.
How much more, then, those who cultivate it!”

401 
“Bhikkhus, if for just the time of a finger snap a bhikkhu develops the liberation of the mind by equanimity,
he is called
a bhikkhu who is not devoid of jhāna, who acts upon the teaching of the Teacher, who responds to his advice, and who does not eat the country’s almsfood in vain.
How much more, then, those who cultivate it!”

402 
“Bhikkhus, if for just the time of a finger snap a bhikkhu dwells contemplating the body in the body, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed longing and dejection in regard to the world,
he is called
a bhikkhu who is not devoid of jhāna, who acts upon the teaching of the Teacher, who responds to his advice, and who does not eat the country’s almsfood in vain.
How much more, then, those who cultivate it!”

403 
“Bhikkhus, if for just the time of a finger snap a bhikkhu dwells contemplating feelings in feelings, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed longing and dejection in regard to the world,
he is called
a bhikkhu who is not devoid of jhāna, who acts upon the teaching of the Teacher, who responds to his advice, and who does not eat the country’s almsfood in vain.
How much more, then, those who cultivate it!”

404 
“Bhikkhus, if for just the time of a finger snap a bhikkhu dwells contemplating mind in mind, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed longing and dejection in regard to the world,
he is called
a bhikkhu who is not devoid of jhāna, who acts upon the teaching of the Teacher, who responds to his advice, and who does not eat the country’s almsfood in vain.
How much more, then, those who cultivate it!”

405 
“Bhikkhus, if for just the time of a finger snap a bhikkhu dwells contemplating phenomena in phenomena, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed longing and dejection in regard to the world,
he is called
a bhikkhu who is not devoid of jhāna, who acts upon the teaching of the Teacher, who responds to his advice, and who does not eat the country’s almsfood in vain.
How much more, then, those who cultivate it!”

(406) generates desire for the non-arising of unarisen bad unwholesome qualities; makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives ...
(407) generates desire for the abandoning of arisen bad unwholesome qualities; makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives ...
(408) generates desire for the arising of unarisen wholesome qualities; makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives ...
(409) generates desire for the maintenance of arisen wholesome qualities, for their non-decline, increase, expansion, and fulfillment by development; makes an effort, arouses energy, applies his mind, and strives ...”

(410) develops the basis for psychic potency that possesses concentration due to desire and activities of striving ...
(411) develops the basis for psychic potency that possesses concentration due to energy and activities of striving ...
(412) develops the basis for psychic potency that possesses concentration due to mind and activities of striving ...
(413) develops the basis for psychic potency that possesses concentration due to investigation and activities of striving ...”

(414) develops the faculty of faith ...
(415) develops the faculty of energy ...
(416) develops the faculty of mindfulness ...
(417) develops the faculty of concentration ...
(418) develops the faculty of wisdom ...
(419) develops the power of faith ...
(420) develops the power of energy ...
(421) develops the power of mindfulness ...
(422) develops the power of concentration ...
(423) develops the power of wisdom ...”

(424) develops the enlightenment factor of mindfulness ...
(425) develops the enlightenment factor of discrimination of phenomena ...
(426) develops the enlightenment factor of energy ...
(427) develops the enlightenment factor of rapture ...
(428) develops the enlightenment factor of tranquility ...
(429) develops the enlightenment factor of concentration ...
(430) develops the enlightenment factor of equanimity ...”

(431) develops right view ...
(432) develops right intention ...
(433) develops right speech ...
(434) develops right action ...
(435) develops right livelihood ...
(436) develops right effort ...
(437) develops right mindfulness ...
(438) develops right concentration ...”

(439) percipient of forms internally, sees forms externally, limited, beautiful or ugly,
and having overcome them, is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see’ ...
(440) percipient of forms internally, sees forms externally, measureless, beautiful or ugly,
and having overcome them, is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see’ ...
(441) not percipient of forms internally, sees forms externally, limited, beautiful or ugly,
and having overcome them, is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see’ ...
(442) not percipient of forms internally, sees forms externally, measureless, beautiful or ugly,
and having overcome them, is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see’ ...
(443) not percipient of forms internally, sees forms externally, blue ones, blue in color, with a blue hue, with a blue tint,
and having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see’ ...
(444) not percipient of forms internally, sees forms externally, yellow ones, yellow in color, with a yellow hue, with a yellow tint,
and having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see’ ...
(445) not percipient of forms internally, sees forms externally, red ones, red in color, with a red hue, with a red tint,
and having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see’ ...
(446) not percipient of forms internally, sees forms externally, white ones, white in color, with a white hue, with a white tint,
and having overcome them, he is percipient thus: ‘I know, I see’ ...”

(447) possessing form sees forms ...
(448) not percipient of forms internally sees forms externally ...
(449) is focused only on ‘beautiful’ ...
(450) with the complete surmounting of perceptions of forms, with the passing away of perceptions of sensory impingement, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, [perceiving] ‘space is infinite,’ enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of space ...
(451) by completely surmounting the base of the infinity of space, [perceiving] ‘consciousness is infinite,’ enters and dwells in the base of the infinity of consciousness ...
(452) by completely surmounting the base of the infinity of consciousness, [perceiving] ‘there is nothing,’ enters and dwells in the base of nothingness ...
(453) by completely surmounting the base of nothingness, enters and dwells in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception ...
(454) by completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, he enters and dwells in the cessation of perception and feeling ...”

(455) develops the earth kasiṇa ...
(456) develops the water kasiṇa ...
(457) develops the fire kasiṇa ...
(458) develops the air kasiṇa ...
(459) develops the blue kasiṇa ...
(460) develops the yellow kasiṇa ...
(461) develops the red kasiṇa ...
(462) develops the white kasiṇa ...
(463) develops the space kasiṇa ...
(464) develops the consciousness kasiṇa ...”

(465) develops the perception of unattractiveness ...
(466) develops the perception of death ...
(467) develops the perception of the repulsiveness of food ...
(468) develops the perception of non-delight in the entire world ...
(469) develops the perception of impermanence ...
(470) develops the perception of suffering in the impermanent ...
(471) develops the perception of non-self in what is suffering ...
(472) develops the perception of abandoning ...
(473) develops the perception of dispassion ...
(474) develops the perception of cessation ...”

(475) develops the perception of impermanence ...
(476) develops the perception of non-self ...
(477) develops the perception of death ...
(478) develops the perception of the repulsiveness of food ...
(479) develops the perception of non-delight in the entire world ...
(480) develops the perception of a skeleton ...
(481) develops the perception of a worm-infested corpse ...
(482) develops the perception of a livid corpse ...
(483) develops the perception of a fissured corpse ...
(484) develops the perception of a bloated corpse ...”

(485) develops recollection of the Buddha ...
(486) develops recollection of the Dhamma ...
(487) develops recollection of the Saṅgha ...
(488) develops recollection of virtuous behavior ...
(489) develops recollection of generosity ...
(490) develops recollection of the deities ...
(491) develops mindfulness of breathing ...
(492) develops mindfulness of death ...
(493) develops mindfulness directed to the body ...
(494) develops recollection of peace ...”

(495) develops the faculty of faith accompanied by the first jhāna ...
(496) develops the faculty of energy ...
(497) develops the faculty of mindfulness ...
(498) develops the faculty of concentration ...
(499) develops the faculty of wisdom ...
(500) develops the power of faith ...
(501) develops the power of energy ...
(502) develops the power of mindfulness ...
(503) develops the power of concentration ...
(504) develops the power of wisdom accompanied by the first jhāna ...”

(505) develops the faculty of faith accompanied by the second jhāna ...
(506) develops the faculty of energy ...
(507) develops the faculty of mindfulness ...
(508) develops the faculty of concentration ...
(509) develops the faculty of wisdom ...
(510) develops the power of faith ...
(511) develops the power of energy ...
(512) develops the power of mindfulness ...
(513) develops the power of concentration ...
(514) develops the power of wisdom accompanied by the second jhāna ...”

(515) develops the faculty of faith accompanied by the third jhāna ...
(516) develops the faculty of energy ...
(517) develops the faculty of mindfulness ...
(518) develops the faculty of concentration ...
(519) develops the faculty of wisdom ...
(520) develops the power of faith ...
(521) develops the power of energy ...
(522) develops the power of mindfulness ...
(523) develops the power of concentration ...
(524) develops the power of wisdom accompanied by the third jhāna ...”

(525) develops the faculty of faith accompanied by the fourth jhāna ...
(526) develops the faculty of energy ...
(527) develops the faculty of mindfulness ...
(528) develops the faculty of concentration ...
(529) develops the faculty of wisdom ...
(530) develops the power of faith ...
(531) develops the power of energy ...
(532) develops the power of mindfulness ...
(533) develops the power of concentration ...
(534) develops the power of wisdom accompanied by the fourth jhāna ...”

(535) develops the faculty of faith accompanied by loving-kindness ...
(536) develops the faculty of energy ...
(537) develops the faculty of mindfulness ...
(538) develops the faculty of concentration ...
(539) develops the faculty of wisdom ...
(540) develops the power of faith ...
(541) develops the power of energy ...
(542) develops the power of mindfulness ...
(543) develops the power of concentration ...
(544) develops the power of wisdom accompanied by loving-kindness ...”

(545) develops the faculty of faith accompanied by compassion ...
(546) develops the faculty of energy ...
(547) develops the faculty of mindfulness ...
(548) develops the faculty of concentration ...
(549) develops the faculty of wisdom ...
(550) develops the power of faith ...
(551) develops the power of energy ...
(552) develops the power of mindfulness ...
(553) develops the power of concentration ...
(554) develops the power of wisdom accompanied by compassion ...”

(555) develops the faculty of faith accompanied by altruistic joy ...
(556) develops the faculty of energy ...
(557) develops the faculty of mindfulness ...
(558) develops the faculty of concentration ...
(559) develops the faculty of wisdom ...
(560) develops the power of faith ...
(561) develops the power of energy ...
(562) develops the power of mindfulness ...
(563) develops the power of concentration ...
(564) develops the power of wisdom accompanied by altruistic joy ...”

(565) develops the faculty of faith accompanied by equanimity ...
(566) develops the faculty of energy ...
(567) develops the faculty of mindfulness ...
(568) develops the faculty of concentration ...
(569) develops the faculty of wisdom ...
(570) develops the power of faith ...
(571) develops the power of energy ...
(572) develops the power of mindfulness ...
(573) develops the power of concentration ...
(574) develops the power of wisdom accompanied by equanimity ...”

... he is called
a bhikkhu who is not devoid of jhāna, who acts upon the teaching of the Teacher, who responds to his advice, and who does not eat the country’s almsfood in vain.
How much more, then, those who cultivate it!”


XIX. MINDFULNESS DIRECTED TO THE BODY

575 
“Bhikkhus, even as one who encompasses with his mind the great ocean includes thereby all the streams that run into the ocean,
just so, whoever develops and cultivates mindfulness directed to the body includes all wholesome qualities that pertain to true knowledge.”

576
Bhikkhus, one thing, when developed and cultivated, leads to a strong sense of urgency.
What is that one thing?
Mindfulness directed to the body.
This is the one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads to a strong sense of urgency.”

577
Bhikkhus, one thing, when developed and cultivated, leads to great good.
What is that one thing?
Mindfulness directed to the body.
This is the one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads to great good.”

578
Bhikkhus, one thing, when developed and cultivated, leads to great security from bondage.
What is that one thing?
Mindfulness directed to the body.
This is the one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads to great security from bondage.”

579
Bhikkhus, one thing, when developed and cultivated, leads to mindfulness and clear comprehension.
What is that one thing?
Mindfulness directed to the body.
This is the one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads to mindfulness and clear comprehension.”

580
Bhikkhus, one thing, when developed and cultivated, leads to the attainment of knowledge and vision.
What is that one thing?
Mindfulness directed to the body.
This is the one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads to the attainment of knowledge and vision.”

581
Bhikkhus, one thing, when developed and cultivated, leads to a pleasant dwelling in this very life.
What is that one thing?
Mindfulness directed to the body.
This is the one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads to a pleasant dwelling in this very life.”

582
Bhikkhus, one thing, when developed and cultivated, leads to realization of the fruit of knowledge and liberation.
What is that one thing?
Mindfulness directed to the body.
This is the one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads to realization of the fruit of knowledge and liberation.”

583 
“Bhikkhus, when one thing is developed and cultivated, the body becomes tranquil, the mind becomes tranquil, thought and examination subside, and all wholesome qualities that pertain to true knowledge reach fulfillment by development.
What is that one thing?
Mindfulness directed to the body.
When this one thing is developed and cultivated, the body becomes tranquil ... and all wholesome qualities that pertain to true knowledge reach fulfillment by development.” (9)

584 
“Bhikkhus, when one thing is developed and cultivated, unarisen unwholesome qualities do not arise and arisen unwholesome qualities are abandoned.
What is that one thing?
Mindfulness directed to the body.
When this one thing is developed and cultivated, unarisen unwholesome qualities do not arise and arisen unwholesome qualities are abandoned.” (10)

585 
“Bhikkhus, when one thing is developed and cultivated, unarisen wholesome qualities arise and arisen wholesome qualities increase and expand.
What is that one thing?
Mindfulness directed to the body.
When this one thing is developed and cultivated, unarisen wholesome qualities arise and arisen wholesome qualities increase and expand.” (11)

586-590
“Bhikkhus, when one thing is developed and cultivated,
ignorance is abandoned,
true knowledge arises,
the conceit ‘I am’ is abandoned,
the underlying tendencies are uprooted,
the fetters are abandoned.
What is that one thing?
Mindfulness directed to the body.
When this one thing is developed and cultivated,
ignorance is abandoned,
true knowledge arises,
the conceit ‘I am’ is abandoned,
the underlying tendencies are uprooted,
the fetters are abandoned.”

591-592
“Bhikkhus, one thing, when developed and cultivated,
leads to differentiation by wisdom...
leads to nibbāna through non-clinging.
What is that one thing?
Mindfulness directed to the body.
This is the one thing that, when developed and cultivated,
leads to differentiation by wisdom...
leads to nibbāna through non-clinging.”

593-595
“Bhikkhus, when one thing is developed and cultivated,
penetration of numerous elements occurs...
penetration of the diversity of elements occurs...
analytical knowledge of numerous elements occurs.
What is that one thing?
It is mindfulness directed to the body.
When this one thing is developed and cultivated,
penetration of the various elements occurs...
penetration of the diversity of elements occurs...
analytical knowledge of the various elements occurs.”

596-599
“Bhikkhus, one thing, when developed and cultivated, leads
to realization of the fruit of stream-entry...
to realization of the fruit of once-returning...
to realization of the fruit of non-returning...
to realization of the fruit of arahantship.
What is that one thing?
It is mindfulness directed to the body.
This is the one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads
to realization of the fruit of stream-entry...
to realization of the fruit of once-returning...
to realization of the fruit of non-returning...
to realization of the fruit of arahantship.”

600-615
“Bhikkhus, one thing, when developed and cultivated, leads
to the obtaining of wisdom...
to the growth of wisdom...
to the expansion of wisdom...
to greatness of wisdom...
to diversity of wisdom...
to vastness of wisdom...
to depth of wisdom...
to a state of unsurpassed wisdom...
to breadth of wisdom...
to abundance of wisdom...
to rapidity of wisdom...
to buoyancy of wisdom...
to joyousness of wisdom...
to swiftness of wisdom...
to keenness of wisdom...
to penetrativeness of wisdom.
What is that one thing?
Mindfulness directed to the body.
This is the one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads
to the obtaining of wisdom...
to the growth of wisdom...
to the expansion of wisdom...
to greatness of wisdom...
to diversity of wisdom...
to vastness of wisdom...
to depth of wisdom...
to a state of unsurpassed wisdom...
to breadth of wisdom...
to abundance of wisdom...
to rapidity of wisdom...
to buoyancy of wisdom...
to joyousness of wisdom...
to swiftness of wisdom...
to keenness of wisdom...
to penetrativeness of wisdom.”


XX. THE DEATHLESS

616 
“Bhikkhus, they do not partake of the deathless who do not partake of mindfulness directed to the body.
They partake of the deathless who partake of mindfulness directed to the body.”

617 
“Bhikkhus, the deathless has not been partaken of by those who have not partaken of mindfulness directed to the body.
The deathless has been partaken of by those who have partaken of mindfulness directed to the body.”

618 
“Bhikkhus, they have fallen away from the deathless who have fallen away from mindfulness directed to the body.
They have not fallen away from the deathless who have not fallen away from mindfulness directed to the body.”

619 
“Bhikkhus, they have neglected the deathless who have neglected mindfulness directed to the body.
They have undertaken the deathless who have undertaken mindfulness directed to the body.”

620 
“Bhikkhus, they are heedless about the deathless who are heedless about mindfulness directed to the body.
They are not heedless about the deathless who are not heedless about mindfulness directed to the body.”

621 
“Bhikkhus, they have forgotten the deathless who have forgotten mindfulness directed to the body.
They have not forgotten the deathless who have not forgotten mindfulness directed to the body.”

622 
“Bhikkhus, they have not pursued the deathless who have not pursued mindfulness directed to the body.
They have pursued the deathless who have pursued mindfulness directed to the body.”

623 
“Bhikkhus, they have not developed the deathless who have not developed mindfulness directed to the body.
They have developed the deathless who have developed mindfulness directed to the body.”

624 
“Bhikkhus, they have not cultivated the deathless who have not cultivated mindfulness directed to the body.
They have cultivated the deathless who have cultivated mindfulness directed to the body.”

625 
“Bhikkhus, they have not directly known the deathless who have not directly known mindfulness directed to the body.
They have directly known the deathless who have directly known mindfulness directed to the body.”

626 
“Bhikkhus, they have not fully understood the deathless who have not fully understood mindfulness directed to the body.
They have fully understood the deathless who have fully understood mindfulness directed to the body.”

627 
“Bhikkhus, they have not realized the deathless who have not realized mindfulness directed to the body.
They have realized the deathless who have realized mindfulness directed to the body.”

The Book of the Ones is finished.

