Venerable Sir, let the Community listen to me! Today is a fifteenth [day] Observance. If it is suitable to 
the Community, [then] the Community should do the Observance [and] should recite the Disciplinary 
Code.
What is the preliminary for the Community? Venerables, announce the purity, [for] I shall recite the 
Disciplinary Code. Let us all (who are) present listen to it carefully (and) let us take it to mind.
Whoever may have an offense, he should disclose (it). When there is no offense, (then it) is to be silent. By the silence I shall know the Venerables (with the thought): “(They are) pure.” As an answer occurs to (a bhikkhu) who is asked individually, just so in such an assembly (as this one) there is the announcement up to the third time. But if any bhikkhu, (who is) remembering (an offense) when the announcement is being made up to the third time, should not disclose the existing offense, there is (a further offense of) deliberate false speech for him. Now, venerables, deliberate false speech has been called an obstructive act by the Fortunate One. Therefore, by a bhikkhu who is remembering, who has committed (an offense), who is desiring purification, an existing offense is to be disclosed; because,(after) having disclosed (it), there is comfort for him.

Herein these four cases involving disqualification come up for recitation.

(P?r 1: Methunadhammasikkh?pada?)
(The training precept on the act of sexual intercourse)
If any bhikkhu (who) has entered upon the training and livelihood for bhikkhus, not 
having rejected the training, not having disclosed (his) incapability, should engage in 
 the act of sexual intercourse, even with just a female animal, he is disqualified, 

not in communion.


(P?r 2: Adinn?d?nasikkh?pada?) 
(The training precept on the taking of what has not been given)
If any bhikkhu should take (what has) not been given from a village or wilderness-area, which is reckoned as theft, (and) the taking of what has not been given (is) of the kind (that) on account of (it) kings, having caught the robber, would physically punish or imprison or banish (him, saying): “You are a robber! You are a fool! You are insane! You are a thief!,” a bhikkhu taking (what has) not been given of such a kind, is also disqualified, not in communion.

(P?r 3: Manussaviggahasikkh?pada?)
 (The training precept on (killing) a human being)
If any bhikkhu should deliberately deprive a human being of life, or should seek an assassin for him, or 
should praise the attractiveness of death, or should incite (him) to death (saying): “Dear man, what (use) is this bad, wretched life for you? Death is better than life for you!” should he, (having) such-thought-and-mind, (having such-) thought-and-intention, praise in manifold ways the beauty of death or incite (him) to death, he also is disqualified, not in communion.
(P?r 4: Uttarimanussadhammasikkh?pada?)
 (The training precept on superhuman states)

If any bhikkhu, (though) not directly knowing (it), should claim a superhuman state pertaining to himself, (a state of) knowing and seeing (that is) suitable for the noble (ones), (saying): “Thus I know! Thus I see!,” (and) then, on another occasion, (whether) being interrogated or not being interrogated, having committed (the offence), desiring purification, should say so: “(Although) not knowing (it,) I spoke thus (saying): `I know,’not seeing (it, I spoke, saying:)`I see.’ I bluffed vainly(and) falsely,”except (when said) in overestimation, he also is disqualified, not in communion.

Venerables, the four cases involving disqualification have been recited, a bhikkhu who has committed any one of them, does not obtain the communion with bhikkhus. As (he was) before, so (he is) after (committing it): he is one who is disqualified, not in communion.
Concerning that I ask the Venerables: (Are you) pure in this?
A second time again I ask: (Are you) pure in this? 
A third time again I ask: (Are you) pure in this?
The venerables are pure in this, therefore there is silence, so do I bear this (in mind).

The recitation of the (cases involving) disqualification is finished


Venerables, these thirteen cases (concerning) the community in the beginning and in the rest (of the
procedure) come up for recitation. 

(Sg 1: 	Sukkavissa??hisikkh?pada?)
(The training precept on emission of semen)

The intentional emission of semen, except in a dream: (this is a case concerning) the community in the 
beginning and in the rest (of the procedure).

2: 	K?yasa?saggasikkh?pada?
(The training precept on physical contact)

If any bhikkhu, under the influence of an altered mind, should engage in (intimate) physical contact 
together with a woman (such as): the holding of a hand, or holding a braid (of hair), or caressing any limb: (this is a case concerning) the community in the beginning and in the rest (of the procedure).

3: 	Du??hullav?c?sikkh?pada?
 (The training precept on depraved words)

If any bhikkhu, under the influence of an altered mind, should speak suggestively with depraved words 
to a woman, like a young man to a young woman, (with words) concerned with sexual intercourse: (this is a case concerning) the community in the beginning and in the rest (of the procedure).

4: 	Attak?map?ricariyasikkh?pada?
(The training precept on (ministering) to himself with love)
If any bhikkhu, under the influence of an altered mind, (and) in the presence of a woman, should speak 
praise about the ministering to himself with sex: “Sister, this is the best of ministerings: she who would 
minister to a virtuous, good natured celibate like me with this act!,” (which is something) connected with sexual intercourse: (this is a case concerning) the community in the beginning and in the rest (of the procedure).

5: 	Sañcarittasikkh?pada?
(The training precept on mediating)
If any bhikkhu should engage in mediating a man's intention to a woman, or a woman's intention to a 
man, for being a wife or for being a mistress, even for being one on (just) that occasion: (this is a case 
concerning) the community in the beginning and in the rest (of the procedure).

6: 	Ku?ik?rasikkh?pada?
(The training precept on making a hut)
By a bhikkhu who is having a hut , which is without an owner, (and) is designated for himself, built by 
means of his own begged requisites, (that hut) is to be built according to the (proper) measure. This is the measure here: twelve spans of the sugata-span in length, (and) inside seven (spans) across. Bhikkhus are to be brought to (it) for appointing the site. By those bhikkhus a site is to be appointed which is not entailing harm (to creatures and which is) having a surrounding space. If a bhikkhu, having requested it himself, should have a hut built on a site entailing harm (to creatures), (and) not having a surrounding space, or if he should not bring bhikkhus to (it) for appointing the site, or if he should let (it) exceed the measure: (this is a case concerning) the community in the beginning and in the rest (of the procedure).

7: 	Vih?rak?rasikkh?pada?
(The training precept on making a dwelling)
By a bhikkhu who is having a large dwelling built, which has an owner, (and) is designated for himself, 
bhikkhus are to be brought to (it) for appointing the site. By those bhikkhus a site not entailing harm (to 
any creatures) (and) having a surrounding space is to be appointed. If a bhikkhu should have a hut built 
on a site entailing harm (to creatures), (and) not having a surrounding space, or if he should not bring 
bhikkhus to (it) for appointing the site, (this is a case concerning) the community in the beginning and in the rest (of the procedure).

8: 	Du??hadosasikkh?pada?
(The training precept on being corrupted by malice)
If any bhikkhu, corrupted by malice (and) upset, should accuse a bhikkhu with a groundless case involving disqualification (thinking): “If only I could make him fall away from this holy life!,” (and) then, on another occasion, (whether) being interrogated or not being interrogated, if that legal issue is really groundless, and if the bhikkhu stands firm in malice: (this is a case concerning) the community in the beginning and in the rest (of the procedure).

9: 	Aññabh?giyasikkh?pada?
 (The training precept on (an issue) belonging to another class)
If any bhikkhu, corrupted by malice (and) upset, should accuse a bhikkhu with a case involving 
disqualification, having taken (it) up (with) some point, which is a mere pretext, of a legal issue belonging to another class (thinking): “If only I could make him fall away from this holy life!,” (and) then, on another occasion, (whether)being interrogated or not being interrogated, if that legal issue is really belonging to another class, (and) some point, which a mere pretext, has been taken up, and if the bhikkhu stands firm in malice: (this is a case concerning) the community in the beginning and in the rest (of the procedure).
10: 	Sa?ghabhedasikkh?pada?
(The training precept on the schism of a community)

If any bhikkhu should endeavor for the schism of a united community, or having undertaken, should 
persist in upholding a legal issue conducive to schism, (then) that bhikkhu should be spoken to thus by 
the bhikkhus: “Let the venerable one not endeavor for the schism of the united community, or having 
undertaken, persist in upholding a legal issue conducive to schism. Let the venerable one convene with 
the community, for a united community, which is on friendly terms, which is not disputing, which has a 
single recitation, dwells in comfort,” and (if) that bhikkhu being spoken to thus by the bhikkhus should 
persist in the same way (as before), (then) that bhikkhu is to be argued with up to three times by the 
bhikkhus for the relinquishing of that (course), (and if that bhikkhu,) being argued with up to three times, should relinquish that (course), then this is good, (but) if he should not relinquish (it): (this is a case concerning) the community in the beginning and in the rest (of the procedure).
 
11: 	Bhed?nuvattakasikkh?pada?
(The training precept on the followers of the schism)
Now, there are bhikkhus who are followers of that same bhikkhu, (and) who are speaking for (his) 
faction: one, or two, or three, (and) they should say so: “Venerables, don't say anything to this bhikkhu! 
This bhikkhu is one who speaks in accordance with the Teaching and this bhikkhu is one who speaks in accordance the Discipline; this (bhikkhu), having received (our) consent and favor defines (the Teaching & Discipline). Knowing us, he speaks, (and) this suits us too.” (Then) those bhikkhus should be spoken to thus by the bhikkhus: “Venerables, don't say so! This bhikkhu does not speak in accordance with the Teaching, and this bhikkhu does not speak in accordance with the Discipline! Don't let the venerables too favor the schism of the community. Let there be convening with the community for the venerables, for a united community, which is on friendly terms, which is not disputing, which has a single recitation, dwells in comfort,” and (if) those bhikkhus being spoken to thus by the bhikkhus should persist in the same way (as before), (then) those bhikkhus are to be argued with up to three times by the bhikkhus for the relinquishing of that (course), (and if those bhikkhus) being argued with up to three times, should relinquish that (course), then this is good, (but) if they should not relinquish (it): (this is a case concerning) the community in the beginning and in the rest (of the procedure).

12: 	Dubbacasikkh?pada?
(The training precept on being of a nature difficult to be spoken to)
Now, a bhikkhu is of a nature difficult to be spoken to, (and when) being righteously spoken to by the 
bhikkhus about the training precepts included in the recitation, he makes himself (one) who can not be 
spoken to (saying): “Venerables, don't say anything good or bad to me, and I too shall not say anything 
good or bad to the venerables! Venerables, refrain from speaking to me!” (Then) that bhikkhu should be spoken to thus by the bhikkhus: “Let the venerable one one not make himself (one) who cannot be spoken to. Let the venerable one make himself (one) who can be spoken to. Let the venerable one speak to the bhikkhus with righteousness and the monks too will speak to the venerable one with righteousness. For the Blessed One's assembly has grown thus, that is, by the speaking of one to another,  by the rehabilitating of one another,” and (if) that bhikkhu being spoken to thus by the bhikkhus should persist in the same way (as before), (then) that bhikkhu is to be argued with up to three times by the bhikkhus for the relinquishing of that (course), (and if that bhikkhu,) being argued with up to three times, should relinquish that (course), then this is good, (but) if he should not relinquish (it): (this is a case concerning) the community in the beginning and in the rest (of the procedure).
13: 	Kulad?sakasikkh?pada?
 (The training precept on the spoiler of families)
Now, a bhikkhu lives dependent upon a certain village or town who is a spoiler of families, who is of bad behavior. His bad behavior is seen and is heard about, and the families spoilt by him are seen and heard about. That bhikkhu is to be spoken to thus by the bhikkhus: “The venerable one is a spoiler of families, one who is of bad behavior. The bad behavior of the venerable one is seen and is heard about, and the families spoilt by the venerable one are seen and are heard about. Let the venerable one depart from this dwelling-place! Enough of you dwelling here!” and (if) that bhikkhu being spoken to thus by the bhikkhus should say thus to those bhikkhus: “The bhikkhus are driven by desire; the bhikkhus are driven by anger; the bhikkhus are driven by delusion; the bhikkhus are driven by fear. They banish someone because of this kind of offense, (but) another one they do not banish.” (Then) that bhikkhu is to be spoken to thus by the bhikkhus: “Let the venerable one not speak thus! The bhikkhus are not driven by desire; and the bhikkhus are not driven by anger; and the bhikkhus are not driven by delusion; and the bhikkhus are not driven by fear. The venerable one is a spoiler of families, one who is of bad behaviour. The bad behaviour of the venerable one is seen and is heard about,  and the families spoilt by the venerable one are seen and are heard about.  Let the venerable one depart from this dwelling-place! Enough of you dwelling here!” and(if) that bhikkhu being spoken to thus by the bhikkhus should persist in the same way (as before), (then) that bhikkhu is to be argued with up to three times by the bhikkhus for the relinquishing of that (course), (and if that bhikkhu,) being argued with up to three times, should relinquish that (course), then this is good, (but) if he should not relinquish (it): (this is a case concerning) the community in the beginning and in the rest (of the procedure).
(Aniyatuddeso  )

(The recitation of the uncertain (cases))

Venerables, these two uncertain cases come up for recitation.

(Aniy 1: 	Pa?hama-aniyatasikkh?pada?)
(The first uncertain training precept)

If any bhikkhu should sit down together with a woman, one (man) with one (woman), privately, on a concealed seat (that is) sufficiently fit for doing (it), (and then if) a female lay-follower whose words can be trusted having seen that, should speak according to one of three cases: according to disqualification, according   to   what   concerns   the   community   in   the   beginning   and   in   the   rest   (of   the   procedure),   or according to expiation, (then) the bhikkhu who is admitting the sitting down should be made to do (what is)   according   to   one   of   three   cases:   according   to   disqualification,   or   according   to   what   concerns   the community in the beginning and in the rest (of the procedure), or according to expiation, or according to whatever that female lay-follower whose words can be trusted should say, according to that the bhikkhu is to be made to do. This is an uncertain case.

(Aniy 2: 	Dutiya-aniyatasikkh?pada?)
(The second uncertain training precept)

But even if the seat is neither concealed nor sufficiently fit for doing it, but is sufficient for speaking suggestively to a woman with depraved words: if any bhikkhu should sit down on such a seat together with a woman—one (man) with one (woman), privately—(and then if) a female lay-follower whose words can be trusted having seen that, should speak according to one of two cases: according to what concerns the community in the beginning and in the rest, or according to expiation, (then) the bhikkhu admitting the sitting down is to be made to do according to one of two cases: according to what concerns the community in the beginning and in the rest (of the procedure), or according to expiation, or according to 
whatever that female lay-follower whose words can be trusted should say, according to that the bhikkhu is to be made to do, this too is an uncertain case.

(Aniyata conclusion)

Venerables, the two uncertain cases have been recited.
Concerning that I ask the Venerables: (Are you) pure in this?
A second time again I ask: (Are you) pure in this? 
A third time again I ask: (Are you) pure in this?
The venerables are pure in this, therefore there is silence, thus I bear this (in mind).
The recitation of the uncertain (cases) is finished.

(Nissaggiya P?cittiy? )

(The (cases) involving expiation with forfeiture)
Venerables, these thirty cases involving expiation with forfeiture come up for recitation.
(The Robe-chapter)

(NP 1: 	Ka?hinasikkh?pada?)
(The training precept on the ka?hina)

When the robe (-cloth) has been finished by a bhikkhu, when the kaþhina (-frame-privileges) have been withdrawn, (then) extra robe (-cloth) is to be kept for ten days at the most. For one who lets it pass beyond (the ten days), (this is a case) involving expiation with forfeiture.

(NP 2: 	Uddositasikkh?pada?)
 (The training precept on the storehouse)

When the robe (-cloth) has been finished by a bhikkhu, when the kaþhina (-frame-privileges) have been withdrawn, if even for a single night a bhikkhu should stay apart from the three robes, except with the authorization of bhikkhus, (this is a case) involving expiation with forfeiture.

(NP 3: 	Ak?lac?varasikkh?pada?)
(The training precept on the out-of-season (robe)-cloth)

When the robe (-cloth) has been finished by a bhikkhu, when the kaþhina (-frame-privileges) have been withdrawn, if out-of-season robe (-cloth) should become available to a bhikkhu, by a bhikkhu who is wishing (so, it) can be accepted; having accepted (it, it) is to be made very quickly. If (the robe-cloth) should not be (enough for) the completion (of the robe), (then) for a month at the most that robe (-cloth) can be put aside by that bhikkhu for the completion of the deficiency (of robe-cloth), when there is an expectation (that he will get more robe-cloth); if he should put (it) aside more than that, even when there is an expectation (that he will get more robe-cloth), (this is a case) involving expiation with forfeiture.

(NP 4: 	Pur??ac?varasikkh?pada?)
(The training precept on the used (robe)-cloth)

If any bhikkhu should have a used robe (-cloth) washed, dyed, or beaten by an unrelated bhikkhunì, (this is a case) involving expiation with forfeiture.)

(NP 5: 	C?varappa?iggaha?asikkh?pada?)
(The training precept on the acceptance of robe (-cloth))

If any bhikkhu should accept a robe (-cloth) from the hand of an unrelated bhikkhunì, except in an exchange (of robes), (this is a case) involving expiation with forfeiture.

(NP 6: 	Aññ?takaviññattisikkh?pada?)
(The training precept on making a suggestion to someone who is not related)

If any bhikkhu should request a robe (-cloth) to an unrelated male householder or female householder, except at the (right) occasion, (this is a case) involving expiation with forfeiture. Here the occasion is this: he is a bhikkhu whose robe has been robbed or whose robe has been lost; this is the occasion here.

(NP 7: 	Tat'uttarisikkh?pada?)
(The training precept on (accepting) more than that)

If the unrelated male householder or female householder should invite him to take (as many) robe (-cloth)s (as he likes), (then) robe (-cloths for) an upper (robe) together with an inner (robe) can be accepted at the most from that robe (-cloth) by that bhikkhu; if he should accept more from that (robe-cloth), (this is a case) involving expiation with forfeiture.

(NP 8: 	Pa?hama-upakkha?asikkh?pada?) 
(The first training precept on setting up (a robe-fund))

Now,   if   an   robe-fund   has   been   set   up   for   a   bhikkhu   by   an   unrelated   male   householder   or   female householder (thinking): “Having traded this robe-fund for a robe, I shall clothe the bhikkhu named so and   so   with   a   robe,”   and   then   if   that   bhikkhu,   previously   uninvited,   having   approached   (the householder), should make a suggestion about the robe (-cloth) (saying}: “It would be good indeed, Sir, (if you) having traded this robe-fund for a such and such a robe, were to clothe me (with a robe),” (if the suggestion is made) out of a liking for what is fine, (this is a case) involving expiation with forfeiture

(NP 9: 	Dutiya-upakkha?asikkh?pada?)
(The second training precept on setting up (a robe-fund))

Now, if separate robe-funds have been set up for a bhikkhu by both unrelated male householders or female householders (thinking): “Having traded these separate robe-funds for separate robes, we shall clothe the bhikkhu named so and so with robes,” and then if that bhikkhu, previously uninvited, having approached (the householders), should make a suggestion about the robe (saying}: “It would be good indeed, Sirs, (if you) having traded these separate robe-funds for a such and such a robe, were to clothe me (with a robe), (you) both being one (donor),” (if the suggestion is made) out of a liking for what is fine, (this is a case) involving expiation with forfeiture.

(NP 10: 	R?jasikkh?pada?)
(The training precept on the king)

Now, if a king or a kings’ official or a brahmin or a male householder should convey by messenger a robe-fund for a bhikkhu (saying): “Having traded this robe-fund for a robe, clothe the bhikkhu named so and so with a robe,” and if that messenger, having approached that bhikkhu, should say so: “Venerable Sir, this robe-fund has been brought for the venerable one. Let the venerable one accept the robe-fund!” (then) that messenger should be spoken to thus by that bhikkhu: “Sir, we do not accept a robe-fund, but we do accept a robe at the right time (when it is) allowable.” If that messenger should say thus to that bhikkhu: 
“Is there, perhaps, someone who is the steward of the venerable one?” (then,) bhikkhus, by a bhikkhu who is in need of a robe, a steward can be appointed: a monastery attendant or a male lay-follower (saying): “Sir, this is the bhikkhus' steward.” If that messenger having instructed that steward, having approached   that   bhikkhu,   should   say   so:   “Venerable   Sir,   the   steward   whom   the   venerable   one   has appointed has been instructed by me. Let the venerable one approach (him) at the right time (and) he will clothe you with a robe,” (then) bhikkhus, having approached the steward, (the steward) can be prompted 
(and) can be reminded two or three times by the bhikkhu who is in need of a robe (saying): “Sir, I am in need of a robe.” (If through) prompting (and) reminding (him) two or three times, he should have (him) bring forth that robe, it is good. If he should not have (him) bring (it) forth, (then) four times, five times, six times at the most, (it) can be stood (for) by (a bhikkhu) who has become silent. (If through) standing silently for (it) four times, five times, six times at the most, he should have (him) bring forth that robe, it is good; if (through) making effort more than that, he should have (him) produce that robe, (this is a case) 
involving expiation with forfeiture. If he should not have (him) produce (it), (then) from wherever (that) the robe-fund may have been brought, there (he) himself can go, or a messenger can be sent (saying): “Sirs, that robe-fund which you conveyed for the bhikkhu does not fulfil any need of that bhikkhu. Let the sirs endeavour for (what is their) own. Let not (what is their) own get lost.” This is the proper procedure here.

The section (starting with the rule) on robes is first. 

(NP 11: 	Kosiyasikkh?pada?)
(The training precept on silk)

If   any   bhikkhu   should   have   a   rug   mixed   with   silk   made,   (this   is   a   case)   involving   expiation   with forfeiture.

(NP 12: 	Suddhak??akasikkh?pada?)
(The training precept on pure black wool)

If any bhikkhu should have a rug made of pure black sheep's wool; (this is a case) involving expiation with forfeiture.

(NP 13: 	Dvebh?gasikkh?pada?)
(The training precept on (using) two parts)

By a bhikkhu who is having a new rug made, two parts of pure black sheep-wool are to be taken, (and) a third (part) of white, a fourth (part) of ruddy brown. If a bhikkhu should have a rug made, without having taken two parts of pure black sheep's hair, (and) a third (part) of white, a fourth (part) of ruddy brown, (this is a case) involving expiation with forfeiture.



(NP 14: 	Chabbassasikkh?pada?)
(The training precept on (keeping a rug for) six years)

By a bhikkhu who has had a new rug made, it is to be kept for six years (at least). If within less than six years, having given up or not having given up that rug, he should have another new rug made, except with the authorisation of bhikkhus, (this is a case) involving expiation with forfeiture.

(NP 15: 	Nis?danasanthatasikkh?pada?)
(The training precept on the sitting cloth)

By a bhikkhu who is having a sitting-rug made, a sugata-span from the border of an old rug is to be taken for making (it) stained. If a bhikkhu, without having taken a sugata-span from the border of an old rug, should have a new sitting cloth made, (this is a case) involving expiation with forfeiture.


(NP 16: 	E?akalomasikkh?pada?)
(The training precept on sheep wool)

Now, if sheep-wool should become available to a bhikkhu who is travelling on a main road, by a bhikkhu who is wishing (so, it) can be accepted, having accepted (it, it) can be carried with his own hand for three yojanas at the most when there is no one present who can carry it; if he should carry it more than that, even when there is no one present who can carry it, (this is a case) involving expiation with forfeiture.

(NP 17: 	E?akalomadhov?panasikkh?pada?)
(The training precept on having sheep-wool washed) 

If any bhikkhu should have sheep-wool washed, dyed, or carded by an unrelated bhikkhunì, (this is a case) involving expiation with forfeiture.

(NP 18:	R?piyasikkh?pada?)
(The training precept on silver)

If any bhikkhu should take gold and silver, or should have (it) taken, or should consent to (it) being deposited (for him), (this is a case) involving expiation with forfeiture.

(NP 19: 	R?piyasa?voh?rasikkh?pada?)
 (The training precept on trading in money)

If   any   bhikkhu   should   engage   in   the   various   kinds   of   trading   in   money,   (this   is   a   case)   involving expiation with forfeiture.
(NP 20: 	Kayavikkayasikkh?pada?)
(The training precept on bartering)

If any bhikkhu should engage in the various kinds of bartering, (this is a case) involving expiation with forfeiture.

The section on sheepwool is second.





























