V The Chapter on the Way to the Beyond
Pārāyanavagga

[190] INTRODUCTORY VERSES223

976. Desiring the state of nothingness,

a brahmin master of the hymns

went from the delightful city of the Kosalans

to a region in the south. (1)

977. In the domain of Assaka,

in the neighborhood of Aḷaka,

he lived on the bank of the Godhāvarī River

by means of gleaning and fruit. (2)

978. Situated nearby

there was a large village.

With the revenue that arose from it,

he held a grand sacrifice. (3)

979. Having completed the grand sacrifice,

he again entered the hermitage.

When he had re-entered,

another brahmin arrived. (4)

980. He had calloused feet, he was thirsty;

he had dirty teeth and a dusty head.

Having approached [his host],

[the visitor] asked for five hundred [coins]. (5)

981. Having beheld him,

Bāvari224 invited him to a seat.

He asked about his happiness and health,

and spoke this statement: (6)

982. “Whatever wealth I had to give away,

I have disposed of it all.

Believe me, brahmin:

I do not have five hundred [coins].” (7) [191]

983. “When I am making this request,

if you do not present it to me,

on the seventh day from now

may your head split into seven parts.” (8)

984. Having put on a performance,

that charlatan uttered a fearsome curse.

Having heard his statement,

Bāvari was despondent. (9)

985. Not eating, he became emaciated,

stricken by the dart of sorrow.

Then, in such a state of mind,

he did not delight in meditation. (10)

986. Having seen him terrified and despondent,

a deity who desired his good

approached Bāvari

and uttered this statement: (11)

987. “That charlatan who desires wealth

does not understand the head.

He has no knowledge at all

about the head or head-splitting.” (12)

988. “If you know, worthy one,

please inform me when you are asked

about the head and head-splitting:

let us hear that word of yours.” (13)

989. “I too do not know this matter;

I have no knowledge at all of this.

For the head and head-splitting:

this is what the conquerors have seen.” (14)

990. “Then, on this circle of the earth,

who knows about the head

and head-splitting?

Tell me this, O deity!” (15) [192]

991. “Earlier already the world-leader,

a descendent of King Okkāka,

a Sakyan son, the maker of light, (16)

went forth from Kapilavatthu.

992. “He, brahmin, is the Enlightened One

who has gone beyond all phenomena,

who has attained all superknowledge and power,

the one with vision into all phenomena.

Having attained the destruction of all kamma,225

he is liberated in the extinction of acquisitions. (17)

993. “The Buddha, the Blessed One in the world,

the One with Vision, teaches the Dhamma.

Go to him and ask him your question:

he will explain that matter to you.” (18)

994. Having heard the word

“Enlightened One,” Bāvari was elated.

His sorrow diminished,

and he gained abundant rapture. (19)

995. Delighted, elated, exhilarated,

Bāvari asked that deity:

“In what village or town, or in what country,

does the World Protector dwell,

where we might go and pay homage226

to the Enlightened One, the best of bipeds?” (20)

996. “The conqueror is in Sāvatthī, in the realm of Kosala;

[there dwells] the one of abundant wisdom, of excellent vast intelligence.

That Sakyan son, unrivaled, free of influxes, bull of men,

is one who understands head-splitting.” (21)

997. He then addressed his pupils,

brahmins who had mastered the hymns:

“Come, brahmin students, I will speak.

Listen to this word of mine. (22) [193]

998. “Now there has arisen in the world

one famed as ‘the Enlightened One,’

one whose manifestation in the world

is rarely encountered.

Go quickly to Sāvatthī

and see the best of bipeds.” (23)

999. “When we see him, brahmin,

how might we know that he is the Buddha?

Since we do not know, tell us

how we might recognize him.” (24)

1000. “The characteristics of a great man

have come down in the hymns.

Thirty-two such marks are explained

complete in their sequence. (25)

1001. “For one whose body has these

characteristics of a great man,

there are only two destinations;

for a third does not exist. (26)

1002. “If he dwells at home,

having conquered this earth

without violence, without a weapon,

he rules over it righteously. (27)

1003. “But if he should go forth

from home to homelessness,

he becomes a buddha with coverings removed,

an unsurpassed arahant. (28)

1004. “Ask him solely with your mind

about [my] birth, clan, characteristics,

hymns, and pupils, and ask further

about the head and head-splitting. (29)

1005. “If he is a buddha,

one of unobstructed vision,

he will reply verbally

to the questions asked by the mind.” (30)

1006. Having heard the word of Bāvari,

his sixteen brahmin pupils —

Ajita, Tissa Metteyya,

Puṇṇaka, and Mettagū, (31) [194]

1007. Dhotaka and Upasīva,

Nanda and Hemaka,

the pair Todeyya and Kappa,

and the wise Jatukaṇṇī, (32)

1008. Bhadrāvudha and Udaya,

and the brahmin Posāla,

the intelligent Mogharāja,

and the great rishi Piṅgiya — (33)

1009. all leaders of their own groups,

famed throughout the whole world,

meditators who delighted in the jhānas,

who had formed past habitual formations, (34)

1010. paid homage to Bāvari,

and having circumambulated him,

all with matted locks, wearing hides,

they set out toward the north — (35)

1011. to Patiṭṭhāna of Aḷaka,

then to the former Māhissatī,

to Ujjenī and Gonaddhā,

Vedisā, and Vanasa, (36)

1012. to Kosambī and Sāketa,

the supreme city Sāvatthī,

Setavya and Kapilavatthu,

and the city Kusinārā, (37)

1013. on to Pāvā and Bhoga city,

to Vesālī, to the Māgadhan city [Rājagaha],

and to the Pāsāṇaka Cetiya,

delightful and charming. (38) [195]

1014. As a thirsty person [seeks] cool water,

as a merchant [seeks] great profit,

or one oppressed by heat [seeks] shade,

they hastily climbed the mountain. (39)

1015. On that occasion the Blessed One

in front of the Sangha of bhikkhus

was teaching the Dhamma to the bhikkhus

like a lion that roars in the woods. (40)

1016. Ajita saw the Buddha,

like the glorious sun with a hundred rays,227

like the moon on the fifteenth [of the fortnight]

when it has arrived at fullness. (41)

1017. Then, having seen his body

and his features complete,

he stood to one side, thrilled,

and asked the questions mentally: (42)

1018. “Speak with reference to his birth;

tell his clan and characteristics;

tell his perfection in the hymns.

How many pupils does the brahmin teach?” (43)

1019. “His age is a hundred and twenty years,

and by clan he is a Bāvari;

there are three characteristics on his body;

he is a master of the Three Vedas, (44)

1020. “of the characteristics and histories,

along with the lexicon and rules of ritual.

He teaches five hundred pupils;

he has reached perfection in his own teaching.” (45) [196]

1021. “O supreme man, reveal in detail

the characteristics of Bāvari.

O you who have cut off craving,

do not let doubt remain in us!” (46)

1022. “He can cover his face with his tongue;

he has a tuft of hair between his eyebrows;

his male organ is enclosed in a sheath:

know thus, brahmin student.” (47)

1023. Having heard the questions answered

without having heard anything being asked,

exhilarated, making salutations,

all the people wondered: (48)

1024. “Was it a deva or Brahmā,

or even Indra, the husband of Sujā,

who asked those questions with the mind?

To whom did he reply?” (49)

1025. “Bāvari asks about the head

and the splitting of the head.

Explain this, Blessed One!

Remove our doubt, O rishi!” (50)

1026. “Know ignorance to be ‘the head’;

clear knowledge is ‘head-splitting’

when conjoined with faith, mindfulness,

concentration, desire, and energy.” (51)

1027. Thereupon the brahmin student,

uplifted by great exhilaration,

arranged his cloak over one shoulder

and fell with his head at the Buddha’s feet. (52)

1028. “The brahmin Bāvari, dear sir,

together with his pupils,

exultant in mind, joyful,

worships your feet, One with Vision.” (53) [197]

1029. “May the brahmin Bāvari be happy,

together with his pupils.

May you too be happy!

May you live long, brahmin student! (54)

1030. “Whatever doubt Bāvari has,

and you, or all the others —

you are given permission, so ask

whatever you wish in your mind.” (55)

1031. Given permission by the Buddha,

Ajita sat down, and making salutation,

he there asked the Tathāgata

the very first question. (56)

1 THE QUESTIONS OF AJITA (AJITAMĀṆAVAPUCCHĀ)228

1032. “By what is the world shrouded?”

(said the Venerable Ajita).

“Why does it not shine?

What do you say is its adhesive?

What is its great peril?” (1)

1033. “The world is shrouded by ignorance,

(Ajita,” said the Blessed One).

“It does not shine because of avarice and heedlessness.

I say that hankering is its adhesive.

Suffering is its great peril.” (2) [198]

1034. “Everywhere the streams are flowing,”

(said the Venerable Ajita).

“What is the barrier against the streams?

Speak of the restraint of the streams:

by what are the streams closed off?” (3)

1035. “Whatever streams there are in the world,

(Ajita,” said the Blessed One),

“mindfulness is the barrier against them.

I speak of this as restraint of the streams.

They are closed off by wisdom.” (4)

1036. “Wisdom and mindfulness,”

(said the Venerable Ajita),

“and name-and-form, dear sir —

when asked by me please declare:

where does this come to an end?” (5)

1037. “As to this question that you ask,

I will tell you, Ajita,

where name and also form

come to an end without remainder:

it is by the cessation of consciousness

that this here comes to an end.” (6)

1038. ‘‘Those who have comprehended the Dhamma,

and the diverse trainees here:

when asked by me about their conduct,

let the judicious one declare it, dear sir.” (7)

1039. ‘‘One should not be greedy for sensual pleasures;

one should be untarnished in mind.

Skillful in regard to all phenomena,

a bhikkhu should wander mindfully.” (8) [199]

2 THE QUESTIONS OF TISSA METTEYYA
(TISSAMETTEYYAMĀṆAVAPUCCHĀ)

1040. “Who here is contented in the world?”

(said the Venerable Tissa Metteyya).

“For whom is there no agitation?

Who, having directly known both ends,

by reflection does not get stuck in the middle?

Whom do you call a great man?

Who here has transcended the seamstress?” (1)

1041. “One leading the spiritual life among sensual pleasures, (Metteyya,” said the Blessed One),

“one without craving, always mindful,

a bhikkhu who is quenched, having comprehended:

for him there is no agitation. (2)

1042. “Having directly known both ends,

by reflection one does not get stuck in the middle.

I call him a great man:

he has here transcended the seamstress.” (3)

3 THE QUESTIONS OF PUṆṆAKA (PUṆṆAKAMĀṆAVAPUCCHĀ)

1043. “To the one without impulse, seer of the root,”

(said the Venerable Puṇṇaka),

“I have come in need with a question: [200]

On what ground have many rishis, men, khattiyas, and brahmins

here in the world performed sacrifice to the deities?229

I ask you, Blessed One: please declare this to me.” (1)

1044. “These many rishis, men, khattiyas, and brahmins,

(Puṇṇaka,” said the Blessed One),

“who here in the world have performed sacrifice to the deities,

did so, Puṇṇaka, yearning for a state of being.

Bound to old age, they performed sacrifices.” (2)

1045. “These many rishis, men, khattiyas, and brahmins,”

(said the Venerable Puṇṇaka),

“who here in the world, heedful on the path of sacrifice,

performed sacrifices to the deities:

did they cross over birth and old age, dear sir?

I ask you, Blessed One: please declare this to me.” (3)

1046. “They yearn, extol, hanker, offer up,

(Puṇṇaka,” said the Blessed One).

“They hanker for sensual pleasures because of gain.

Intent on sacrifice, excited by lust for existence,

they did not cross over birth and old age, I say.” (4) [201]

1047. “If, dear sir, those intent on sacrifice,”

(said the Venerable Puṇṇaka),

“by their sacrifices did not cross over birth and old age,

then who here in the world of devas and humans

has crossed over birth and old age, dear sir?

I ask you, Blessed One: please declare this for me.” (5)

1048. “Having comprehended the far and near in the world, (Puṇṇaka,” said the Blessed One),

“one without agitation anywhere in the world,

peaceful, fumeless, untroubled, wishless,

has crossed over birth and old age, I say.” (6)

4 THE QUESTIONS OF METTAGŪ (METTAGŪMĀṆAVAPUCCHĀ)

1049. “I ask you a question, Blessed One, please tell me this,” (said the Venerable Mettagū).

“I consider you a Veda-master, one inwardly developed.

From where have these sufferings arisen

in their many forms in the world?” (1) [202]

1050. “You have asked me about the origin of suffering,

(Mettagū,” said the Blessed One).

“As one who understands, I will tell you this.

Sufferings in their many forms in the world

originate based on acquisition.230 (2)

1051. “The ignorant dullard who creates acquisition

encounters suffering again and again.

Therefore, understanding,231 one should not create acquisition,

contemplating it as the genesis and origin of suffering.” (3)

1052. “You have told us what we asked.

Let me ask you another — please speak on this.

How do the wise cross over the flood,

over birth and old age, sorrow and lamenting?

Explain this to me clearly, muni,

for this Dhamma has been understood by you.” (4)

1053. “I will proclaim this Dhamma to you,

(Mettagū,” said the Blessed One),

“seen in this very life, no matter of hearsay,

having understood which, living mindfully,

one can cross over attachment to the world.” (5)

1054. “And I delight, great rishi,

in that supreme Dhamma,

having understood which, living mindfully,

one can cross over attachment to the world.” (6)

1055. “Whatever you comprehend,

(Mettagū,” said the Blessed One),

“above, below, and across in the middle, [203]

having dispelled delight and attachment to these,

consciousness would not persist in existence. (7)

1056. “A bhikkhu so dwelling, mindful, heedful,

having given up taking things as ‘mine,’

right here such a wise one might abandon suffering:

birth and old age, sorrow and lamenting.” (8)

1057. “I delight in this word of the great rishi;

well procaimed, Gotama, is the state without acquisitions.

Certainly the Blessed One has abandoned suffering,

for this Dhamma has been understood by you. (9)

1058. “Surely they too can abandon suffering

whom you, muni, would constantly exhort.

Therefore, having met you, O nāga, I pay homage:

perhaps the Blessed One would constantly exhort me.” (10)

1059. “Whatever brahmin you may know to be a Veda-master,

owning nothing, unattached to sensual pleasures and existence,

he has certainly crossed this flood,

and crossed to the beyond, he is unbarren, rid of doubt. (11)

1060. “And the wise man here, the Veda-master,

having loosened this tie to various states of existence, [204]

rid of craving, untroubled, wishless,

has crossed over birth and old age, I say.” (12)

5 THE QUESTIONS OF DHOTAKA (DHOTAKAMĀṆAVAPUCCHĀ)

1061. “I ask you, Blessed One, speak to me of this,”

(said the Venerable Dhotaka).

“I long for your speech, great rishi:

having heard your utterance,

I shall train for my own nibbāna.” (1)

1062. “In that case, apply ardor,

(Dhotaka,” said the Blessed One).

“Be judicious and mindful right here.

Having heard the utterance from me,

you should train for your own nibbāna.” (2)

1063. “I see in the world of devas and human beings,

a brahmin owning nothing, traveling about.

Hence I pay homage to you, O universal eye!

Free me, Sakya, from perplexity.” (3)

1064. “I will not be able to free anyone in the world,232

Dhotaka, who is still afflicted by perplexity.

But understanding the supreme Dhamma,

you will thereby cross this flood.” (4)

1065. “Taking compassion, instruct me, Brahmā,

in the state of seclusion that I can understand. [205]

Just as space is totally unobstructed,

right here I would live, peaceful and unattached.” (5)

1066. “I will describe that peace for you,

(Dhotaka,” said the Blessed One),

“[seen] in this very life, no matter of hearsay,

having understood which, living mindfully,

one can cross over attachment to the world.” (6)

1067. “And I delight, great rishi,

in that supreme peace,

having understood which, living mindfully,

one can cross over attachment to the world.” (7)

1068. “Whatever you comprehend

(Dhotaka,” said the Blessed One),

“above, below, and across in the middle,

having understood this as ‘a tie’ in the world,

do not create craving for various states of existence.” (8)

6 THE QUESTIONS OF UPASĪVA 
(UPASĪVAMĀṆAVAPUCCHĀ)

1069. “Alone, Sakya, unsupported,”

(said the Venerable Upasīva),

“I am not able to cross over the great flood.

Declare to me a basis, O universal eye,

supported by which I might cross over this flood.”233 (1)

1070. “Contemplating nothingness, mindful,

(Upasīva,” said the Blessed One),

“supported by ‘there is not,’ cross over the flood. [206]

Having abandoned sensual pleasures, refraining from perplexity,

night and day see into the destruction of craving.” (2)

1071. “One devoid of lust for all sensual pleasures,”

(said the Venerable Upasīva),

“supported by nothingness, having discarded all else,

liberated in the supreme emancipation of perception: 234

would he stay there without departing?” (3)

1072. “One devoid of lust for all sensual pleasures,

(Upasīva,” said the Blessed One),

“supported by nothingness, having discarded all else,

liberated in the supreme emancipation of perception,

would stay there without departing.” (4)

1073. “If he would stay there without departing

even for a multitude of years, O universal eye,

would he become cool, liberated right there —

[or] would the consciousness of such a one pass away?”235 (5)

1074. “As a flame, thrown by a gust of wind,

(Upasīva,” said the Blessed One),

“goes out and cannot be designated, [207]

so the muni, liberated from the mental body,

goes out and cannot be designated.” (6)

1075. “But does one who has gone out not exist,

or else is he intact through eternity?

Explain this matter clearly to me, O muni,

for this Dhamma has been understood by you.” (7)

1076. “There is no measure of one who has gone out,

(Upasīva,” said the Blessed One).

“There is no means by which they might speak of him.

When all phenomena have been uprooted,

all pathways of speech are also uprooted.” (8)

7 THE QUESTIONS OF NANDA (NANDAMĀṆAVAPUCCHĀ)

1077. “There are munis in the world,”

(said the Venerable Nanda),

“so people say, but how is this so?

Do they declare one who has knowledge a muni

or one following a particular way of life?” (1)

1078. “Not by view, nor by learning, nor by knowledge,

Nanda, do the skilled here speak of a muni. [208]

They are munis, I say, who live remote,

untroubled, without wishes.” (2)

1079. “Those ascetics and brahmins,”

(said the Venerable Nanda),

“who say that purity [is gained] through the seen and heard,

that purity [is gained], too, by good behavior and observances,

who say purity [is gained] through numerous methods —

living restrained236 there, Blessed One, have they

crossed over birth and old age, dear sir?

I ask you, Blessed One. Please answer me.” (3)

1080. “Those ascetics and brahmins,

(Nanda,” said the Blessed One),

“who say that purity [is gained] through the seen and heard,

that purity [is gained], too, by good behavior and observances,

who say purity [is gained] through numerous methods —

though they live restrained there, I say

they have not crossed over birth and old age.” (4)

1081. “Those ascetics and brahmins,”

(said the Venerable Nanda),

“who say that purity [is gained] through the seen and heard,

that purity [is gained], too, by good behavior and observances,

who say purity [is gained] through numerous methods —

if, O muni, you say they have not crossed the flood,237 [209]

then who in the world of devas and humans

has crossed over birth and old age, dear sir?

I ask you, Blessed One. Please answer me.” (5)

1082. “I do not say of all ascetics and brahmins,

(Nanda,” said the Blessed One),

“that they are shrouded by birth and old age.

Those here who have abandoned the seen, the heard and sensed,

and all good behavior and observances,

who have abandoned, too, everything of numerous kinds,

who, having fully understood craving, are without influxes:

those, I say, are ‘persons who have crossed the flood.’ ” (6)

1083. “I delight in this word of the great rishi.

Well procaimed, O Gotama, is the state without acquisitions.

Those here who have abandoned the seen, heard, and sensed,

as well as all good behavior and observances,

who have abandoned, too, everything of numerous kinds,

who, having fully understood craving, are without influxes:

I too say: ‘They have crossed the flood.’ ” (7)

8 THE QUESTIONS OF HEMAKA (HEMAKAMĀṆAVAPUCCHĀ)

1084. “Those who in the past explained things to me,”

(said the Venerable Hemaka), [210]

“before [my meeting with] Gotama’s teaching,

saying, ‘Such it was, such it will be,’

all that was hearsay,

all was an increase of thought;

I did not delight in it.238 (1)

1085. “Declare to me the Dhamma,

O muni, the destruction of craving,

having understood which, living mindfully,

one can cross over attachment to the world.” (2)

1086. “The dispelling of desire and lust, Hemaka,

for things here seen, heard, sensed, and cognized —

for whatever has a pleasing nature —

is the state of nibbāna, the imperishable. (3)

1087. “Having understood this, those mindful ones

are quenched in this very life.

And always peaceful, they have crossed over

attachment to the world.” (4)

9 THE QUESTIONS OF TODEYYA (TODEYYAMĀṆAVAPUCCHĀ)

1088. “For one in whom sensual desires do not dwell,”

(said the Venerable Todeyya),

“in whom craving is not found

and who has crossed over perplexity,

of what sort is his emancipation?” (1) [211]

1089. “For one in whom sensual desires do not dwell,

(Todeyya,” said the Blessed One),

“in whom craving is not found

and who has crossed over perplexity:

there is no further emancipation for him.” (2)

1090. “Is he without desire239 or does he have desire?

Does he possess wisdom or just a wise manner?

So that I can understand, O Sakka,

explain the muni to me, O universal eye.” (3)

1091. “He is without desire; he does not have desire.

He possesses wisdom, not just a wise manner.

Understand the muni thus, Todeyya,

as one owning nothing, unattached

to sensual pleasures and existence.” (4)

10 THE QUESTIONS OF KAPPA (KAPPAMĀṆAVAPUCCHĀ)

1092. “For those standing in the midst of the stream,”

(said the Venerable Kappa),

“when a perilous flood has arisen,

for those oppressed by old age and death,

declare an island, dear sir.

Explain to me the island

so this might occur no more.” (1) [212]

1093. “For those standing in the midst of the stream,

(Kappa,” said the Blessed One),

“when a perilous flood has arisen,

for those oppressed by old age and death,

let me declare an island to you. (2)

1094. “Owning nothing, taking nothing:

this is the island with nothing further.

I call this ‘nibbāna,’

the extinction of old age and death. (3)

1095. “Having understood this, those mindful ones

are quenched in this very life.

They do not come under Māra’s control,

nor are they Māra’s footmen.” (4)

11 THE QUESTIONS OF JATUKAṆṆĪ (JATUKAṆṆĪMĀṆAVAPUCCHĀ)

1096. “Having heard of the hero who has no desire for sensual pleasures,” (said the Venerable Jatukaṇṇī),

“I have come to ask the desireless one who has escaped the flood.

Speak about the state of peace, you of innate vision.

Tell me about it, Blessed One, as it actually is. (1)

1097. “For the Blessed One has overcome sensual desires,

as the splendid sun overcomes the earth with its splendor.

Since I am one of limited wisdom, teach me the Dhamma,

you of broad wisdom, so that I might understand

the abandoning here of birth and old age.” (2) [213]

1098. “Remove greed for sensual pleasures,

(Jatukaṇṇī,” said the Blessed One),

“having seen renunciation as security.

Do not take up or reject anything:

let neither of these exist for you. (3)

1099. “Dry up what pertains to the past,

do not take up anything to come later.

If you will not grasp in the middle,

you will live at peace. (4)

1100. “For one, brahmin, entirely

devoid of greed for name-and-form,

the influxes do not exist by which

one might come under death’s control.” (5)

12 THE QUESTIONS OF BHADRĀVUDHA 
(BHADRĀVUDHAMĀṆAVAPUCCHĀ)

1101. “I entreat the home-leaver,”

(said the Venerable Bhadrāvudha),

“the cutter off of craving, one without impulse,

who has abandoned delight, crossed the flood, won liberation,

abandoned mental constructs — one extremely wise:

having heard this from the nāga,

they will depart from here.240 (1)

1102. “Various peoples from [various] countries

have gathered desiring your word, O hero.

Explain matters well to them,

for this Dhamma has been understood by you.” (2)

1103. “One should remove all acquisitive craving,

(Bhadrāvudha,” said the Blessed One),

“above, below, and across in the middle. [214]

Whatever they cling to in the world,

by this itself Māra pursues a person. (3)

1104. “Therefore understanding this, a mindful bhikkhu

should not cling to anything in the entire world.

Observing, ‘They are stuck on taking up,’ [he knows]

this population is attached to the realm of death.” (4)

13 THE QUESTIONS OF UDAYA (UDAYAMĀṆAVAPUCCHĀ)

1105. “I have come in need with a question,”

(said the Venerable Udaya),

“to the seated meditator, dust-free,

who has completed the task, without influxes,

who has gone beyond all phenomena.

Speak of emancipation by final knowledge,

the breaking up of ignorance.” (1)

1106. “The abandoning of both,

(Udaya,” said the Blessed One),

“sensual desires and dejection;

the dispelling of mental dullness,

the warding off of regrets: (2)

1107. “purified by equanimity and mindfulness,

preceded by thought on the Dhamma —

I call this emancipation by final knowledge,

the breaking up of ignorance.” (3) [215]

1108. “By what is the world fettered?

What is its means of traveling about?

By the abandoning of what

is ‘nibbāna’ spoken of?” (4)

1109. “The world is fettered by delight;

thought is its means of traveling about.

It is by the abandoning of craving

that ‘nibbāna’ is spoken of.” (5)

1110. “How does one live mindfully

for consciousness to cease?

Having come to ask the Blessed One,

let us hear that word of yours.” (6)

1111. “For one not seeking delight in feeling

internally and externally,

for one living mindfully thus,

consciousness ceases.” (7)

14 THE QUESTIONS OF POSĀLA 
(POSĀLAMĀṆAVAPUCCHĀ)

1112. “I have come in need with a question,”

(said the Venerable Posāla),

“to the one who points out the past,

who is without impulse, who has cut off doubt,

who has gone beyond all phenomena. (1)

1113. “I ask, Sakya, about the knowledge

of one for whom perception of form has vanished,

who has entirely abandoned the body,

who sees ‘there is nothing’

internally and externally:

how is such a one to be led?” (2) [216]

1114. “Directly knowing all stations of consciousness,

(Posāla,” said the Blessed One),

“the Tathāgata knows this one

remaining, who is liberated,

who has that as support. (3)

1115. “Having known the origin of nothingness

thus, ‘delight is the fetter,’

having directly known it in such a way,241

one then sees into it with insight.

This is the real knowledge of the brahmin,

one who has lived the spiritual life.” (4)

15 THE QUESTIONS OF MOGHARĀJA (MOGHARĀJAMĀṆAVAPUCCHĀ)

1116. “I have asked the Sakyan twice,”

(said the Venerable Mogharāja),

“but the One with Vision did not answer me.

Yet I have heard that the divine rishi

answers upon the third request. (1)

1117. “As to this world, the other world,

the brahma world together with the devas,

I do not know your view,

[the view] of the famous Gotama. (2) [217]

1118. “Thus I have come in need with a question

to the one of excellent vision.

How does one look upon the world,

so that the King of Death does not see one?” (3)

1119. “Look upon the world as empty,

Mogharāja, being ever mindful.

Having uprooted the view of self,

one may thus cross over death.

The King of Death does not see

one who looks upon the world thus.” (4)

16 THE QUESTIONS OF PIṄGIYA (PIṄGIYAMĀṆAVAPUCCHĀ)

1120. “I am old, weak, my color gone,”

(said the Venerable Piṅgiya),

“my eyesight is not clear, my hearing is faint.

Do not let me perish confused along the way.

Declare the Dhamma that I might understand

the abandoning here of birth and old age.” (1)

1121. “Having seen those stricken by forms,

(Piṅgiya,” said the Blessed One),

“people who are heedless, afflicted by forms,

therefore, Piṅgiya, being heedful,

abandon form for an end to renewed existence.” (2)

1122. “In the four directions, the four intermediate directions,

above, below: in these ten directions, [218]

there is nothing that you have not seen, heard, and sensed,

and nothing in the world uncognized by you.

Declare the Dhamma that I might understand

the abandoning here of birth and old age.” (3)

1123. “Observing people fallen into craving,

(Piṅgiya,” said the Blessed One),

“tormented, crushed by old age,

therefore, Piṅgiya, being heedful,

abandon craving for an end to renewed existence.” (4)

EPILOGUE

Verses Extolling the Way to the Beyond242

This is what the Blessed One said while dwelling among the Magadhans at the Pāsāṇaka Cetiya. When entreated by the sixteen attendant brahmins and questioned by each, he answered their questions. If one understands the meaning and the teaching in each of these [sections of] questions, and practices in accordance with the Dhamma, one would go beyond old age and death. Since these teachings lead beyond, this exposition of the Dhamma is designated the Pārāyana, “The Way to the Beyond.”

1124. Ajita, Tissa Metteyya, Puṇṇaka, and Mettagū,

Dhotaka and Upasīva, Nanda and also Hemaka; (1) [219]

1125. Todeyya and Kappa, and the wise Jatukaṇṇī,

Bhadrāvudho and Udaya, and the brahmin Posāla,

the intelligent Mogharājā, and the great rishi Piṅgiya: (2)

1126. they approached the Buddha,

the rishi of excellent conduct;

asking subtle questions,

they came to the supreme Buddha. (3)

1127. When asked questions by them,

the Buddha answered in accordance with truth.

With his answers to their questions,

the muni satisfied the brahmins. (4)

1128. Satisfied by the One with Vision,

by the Buddha, Kinsman of the Sun,

they lived the spiritual life

under the one with excellent wisdom. (5)

1129. If one would practice in the way

they were taught by the Buddha

in response to each of their questions,

one would go from the near shore to the beyond. (6)

1130. Developing the supreme path,

one would go from the near shore to the beyond.

That path is for going to the beyond;

therefore it is called “the Way to the Beyond.” (7)

Verses Recited about the Way to the Beyond243

1131. “I will recite the Way to the Beyond,”

(said the Venerable Piṅgiya).

“As he saw it, just so he expounded it,

the stainless one, the one of broad intelligence.

For what reason would the nāga,244

desireless, disentangled, speak falsely? (8) [220]

1132. “Come now, let me explain

the beautiful utterance of the one

who has abandoned stains and delusion,

who has abandoned conceit and denigration. (9)

1133. “The dispeller of darkness, the Buddha, the universal eye,

who has gone to the world’s end, transcended all existences,

the one without influxes, who has abandoned all suffering,

who is truly named, O brahmin, he is served by me. (10)

1134. “As a bird that has left behind a small woods

might settle upon a forest abounding in fruit,

just so, having left those of little vision,

I am like a goose that has arrived at a great lake. (11)

1135. “Those who in the past explained things to me,

before [my meeting with] Gotama’s teaching,

saying, ‘Such it was, such it will be,’

all that was hearsay,

all was an increase of thought.245 (12)

1136. “The dispeller of darkness seated alone,

the brilliant one,246 the maker of light,

Gotama of broad wisdom,

Gotama of broad intelligence — (13) [221]

1137. “he is the one who taught me the Dhamma,

directly visible, immediate,

the destruction of craving, without adversity,

for which there is no simile anywhere.” (14)

1138. “Why do you dwell apart from him

even for a moment, O Piṅgiya,

from Gotama of broad wisdom,

from Gotama of broad intelligence, (15)

1139. “the one who taught you the Dhamma,

directly visible, immediate,

the destruction of craving, without adversity,

for which there is no simile anywhere?” (16)

1140. “I do not dwell apart from him

even for a moment, O brahmin,

from Gotama of broad wisdom,

from Gotama of broad intelligence, (17)

1141. “the one who taught me the Dhamma,

directly visible, immediate,

the destruction of craving, without adversity,

for which there is no simile anywhere. (18)

1142. “Heedful, O brahmin, night and day,

I see him with my mind as if with my eyes.

I pass the night paying homage to him;

hence I do not think I am apart from him. (19)

1143. “My faith and rapture, mind and mindfulness,

do not depart from Gotama’s teaching.

To whatever direction the one of broad wisdom goes,

I pay homage to him in that same direction. (20) [222]

1144. “Since I am old and feeble,

my body does not travel there,

but I go constantly on a journey of thought,

for my mind, brahmin, is united with him. (21)

1145. “As I lay trembling in the mud,

I floated from island to island.

Then I saw the Enlightened One,

influx-free, who had crossed the flood.” (22)

[The Buddha]

1146. “As Vakkali had sent forth faith,

and Bhadrāvudha and Āḷavi Gotama,

just so you too must send forth faith:

then, Piṅgiya, you will go

beyond the realm of death.” (23)

[Piṅgiya]

1147. “I am pleased even more,

having heard the word of the muni.

The Enlightened One, with coverings removed,

is not barren, gifted with ingenuity. (24)

1148. “Having directly known about the devas,

he understood everything, high and low.

The Teacher is the end-maker of questions

for those in doubt who acknowledge this. (25) [223]

1149. “The immovable, the unshakable,

has no simile anywhere.

Surely I will go there; I have no doubt about this.

Thus remember me as one with mind resolved.” (26)

The Suttanipāta is completed.
