The Chapter on the Way to the Beyond

The questions of Ajita

“By what is the world shrouded?” (Venerable Ajita).
“Why does it not shine?
What do you say is its adhesive?
What is its great peril?”

“The world is shrouded by ignorance, (Ajita,” said the Blessed One).
“It does not shine because of avarice and heedlessness.
I say that hankering is its adhesive.
Suffering is its great peril.”

“Everywhere the streams are flowing,” (said the Venerable Ajita).
“What is the barrier against the streams?
Speak of the restraint of the streams:
by what are the streams closed off?”

“Whatever streams there are in the world, (Ajita,” said the Blessed One),
“mindfulness is the barrier against them.
I speak of this as restraint of the streams.
They are closed off by wisdom.”

“Wisdom and mindfulness,” (said the Venerable Ajita),
“and name-and-form, dear sir —
when asked by me please declare:
where does this come to an end?”

“As to this question that you ask,
I will tell you, Ajita,
where name and also form
come to an end without remainder:
it is by the cessation of consciousness,
that this here comes to an end.”

“Those who have comprehended the Dhamma,
and the diverse trainees here:
when asked by me about their conduct,
let the judicious one declare it, dear sir.”

“One should not be greedy for sensual pleasures;
one should be untarnished in mind.
Skillful in regard to all phenomena,
a bhikkhu should wander mindfully.”



The questions of Tissa Metteyya

“Who here is contented in the world?” (said the Venerable Tissa Metteyya).
“For whom is there no agitation?
Who, having directly known both ends,
by reflection does not get stuck in the middle?
Whom do you call a great man?
Who here has transcended the seamstress?”

“One leading the spiritual life among sensual pleasures, (Metteyya,” said the Blessed One),
“one without craving, always mindful,
a bhikkhu who is quenched, having comprehended:
for him there is no agitation.

“Having directly known both ends,
by reflection one does not get stuck in the middle.
I call him a great man:
he has here transcended the seamstress.”



The questions of Puṇṇaka

“To the one without impulse, seer of the root,” (said the Venerable Puṇṇaka),
“I have come in need with a question:
On what ground have many rishis, men,
khattiyas, and brahmins
here in the world performed sacrifice to the deities?
I ask you, Blessed One: please declare this to me.”

“These many rishis, men, (Puṇṇaka,” said the Blessed One),
khattiyas, and brahmins,
who here in the world have performed sacrifice to the deities,
did so, Puṇṇaka, yearning for a state of being.
Bound to old age, they performed sacrifices.”

“These many rishis, men, (said the Venerable Puṇṇaka),
khattiyas, and brahmins, who here in the world,
heedful on the path of sacrifice,
performed sacrifices to the deities:
did they cross over birth and old age, dear sir?
I ask you, Blessed One: please declare this to me.”

“They yearn, extol, hanker, offer up, (Puṇṇaka,” said the Blessed One).
“They hanker for sensual pleasures because of gain.
Intent on sacrifice, excited by lust for existence,
they did not cross over birth and old age, I say.”

“If, dear sir, those intent on sacrifice,” (said the Venerable Puṇṇaka),
“by their sacrifices did not cross over birth and old age,
then who here in the world of devas and humans,
has crossed over birth and old age, dear sir?
I ask you, Blessed One: please declare this for me.”

“Having comprehended the far and near in the world, (Puṇṇaka,” said the Blessed One),
“one without agitation anywhere in the world,
peaceful, fumeless, untroubled, wishless,
has crossed over birth and old age, I say.”



The questions of Mettagū

“I ask you a question, Blessed One, please tell me this,” (said the Venerable Mettagū).
“I consider you a Veda-master, one inwardly developed.
From where have these sufferings arisen
in their many forms in the world?”

“You have asked me about the origin of suffering, (Mettagū,” said the Blessed One).
“As one who understands, I will tell you this.
Sufferings in their many forms in the world
originate based on acquisition. 

“The ignorant dullard who creates acquisition
encounters suffering again and again.
Therefore, understanding, one should not create acquisition,
contemplating it as the genesis and origin of suffering.”

“You have told us what we asked.
Let me ask you another — please speak on this.
How do the wise cross over the flood,
over birth and old age, sorrow and lamenting?
Explain this to me clearly, muni,
for this Dhamma has been understood by you.”

“I will proclaim this Dhamma to you, (Mettagū,” said the Blessed One),
“seen in this very life, no matter of hearsay,
having understood which, living mindfully,
one can cross over attachment to the world.”

“And I delight, great rishi,
in that supreme Dhamma,
having understood which, living mindfully,
one can cross over attachment to the world.”

“Whatever you comprehend, (Mettagū,” said the Blessed One),
“above, below, and across in the middle,
having dispelled delight and attachment to these,
consciousness would not persist in existence.

“A bhikkhu so dwelling, mindful, heedful,
having given up taking things as ‘mine,’
right here such a wise one might abandon suffering:
birth and old age, sorrow and lamenting.”

“I delight in this word of the great rishi;
well procaimed, Gotama, is the state without acquisitions.
Certainly the Blessed One has abandoned suffering,
for this Dhamma has been understood by you.

“Surely they too can abandon suffering
whom you, muni, would constantly exhort.
Therefore, having met you, O nāga, I pay homage:
perhaps the Blessed One would constantly exhort me.”

“Whatever brahmin you may know to be a Veda-master,
owning nothing, unattached to sensual pleasures and existence,
he has certainly crossed this flood,
and crossed to the beyond, he is unbarren, rid of doubt.

“And the wise man here, the Veda-master,
having loosened this tie to various states of existence,
rid of craving, untroubled, wishless,
has crossed over birth and old age, I say.”



The questions of Dhotaka

“I ask you, Blessed One, speak to me of this,” (said the Venerable Dhotaka).
“I long for your speech, great rishi:
having heard your utterance,
I shall train for my own nibbāna.”

“In that case, apply ardor, (Dhotaka,” said the Blessed One).
“Be judicious and mindful right here.
Having heard the utterance from me,
you should train for your own nibbāna.”

“I see in the world of devas and human beings,
a brahmin owning nothing, traveling about.
Hence I pay homage to you, O universal eye!
Free me, Sakya, from perplexity.”

“I will not be able to free anyone in the world,
Dhotaka, who is still afflicted by perplexity.
But understanding the supreme Dhamma,
you will thereby cross this flood.”

“Taking compassion, instruct me, Brahmā,
in the state of seclusion that I can understand.
Just as space is totally unobstructed,
right here I would live, peaceful and unattached.”

“I will describe that peace for you, (Dhotaka,” said the Blessed One),
“[seen] in this very life, no matter of hearsay,
having understood which, living mindfully,
one can cross over attachment to the world.”

“And I delight, great rishi,
in that supreme peace,
having understood which, living mindfully,
one can cross over attachment to the world.”

“Whatever you comprehend (Dhotaka,” said the Blessed One),
“above, below, and across in the middle,
having understood this as ‘a tie’ in the world,
do not create craving for various states of existence.”



The questions of Upasīva

“Alone, Sakya, unsupported,” (said the Venerable Upasīva),
“I am not able to cross over the great flood.
Declare to me a basis, O universal eye,
supported by which I might cross over this flood.”

“Contemplating nothingness, mindful, (Upasīva,” said the Blessed One),
“supported by ‘there is not,’ cross over the flood.
Having abandoned sensual pleasures, refraining from perplexity,
night and day see into the destruction of craving.”

“One devoid of lust for all sensual pleasures,” (said the Venerable Upasīva),
“supported by nothingness, having discarded all else,
liberated in the supreme emancipation of perception: 234
would he stay there without departing?”

“One devoid of lust for all sensual pleasures, (Upasīva,” said the Blessed One),
“supported by nothingness, having discarded all else,
liberated in the supreme emancipation of perception,
would stay there without departing.”

“If he would stay there without departing
even for a multitude of years, O universal eye,
would he become cool, liberated right there —
[or] would the consciousness of such a one pass away?”

“As a flame, thrown by a gust of wind, (Upasīva,” said the Blessed One),
“goes out and cannot be designated,
so the muni, liberated from the mental body,
goes out and cannot be designated.”

“But does one who has gone out not exist,
or else is he intact through eternity?
Explain this matter clearly to me, O muni,
for this Dhamma has been understood by you.”

“There is no measure of one who has gone out, (Upasīva,” said the Blessed One).
“There is no means by which they might speak of him.
When all phenomena have been uprooted,
all pathways of speech are also uprooted.”



The questions of Nanda

“There are munis in the world,” (said the Venerable Nanda),
“so people say, but how is this so?
Do they declare one who has knowledge a muni,
or one following a particular way of life?”

“Not by view, nor by learning, nor by knowledge,
Nanda, do the skilled here speak of a muni.
They are munis, I say, who live remote,
untroubled, without wishes.”

“Those ascetics and brahmins,” (said the Venerable Nanda),
“who say that purity [is gained] through the seen and heard,
that purity [is gained], too, by good behavior and observances,
who say purity [is gained] through numerous methods —
living restrained there, Blessed One, have they
crossed over birth and old age, dear sir?
I ask you, Blessed One. Please answer me.”

“Those ascetics and brahmins, (Nanda,” said the Blessed One),
“who say that purity [is gained] through the seen and heard,
that purity [is gained], too, by good behavior and observances,
who say purity [is gained] through numerous methods —
though they live restrained there, I say
they have not crossed over birth and old age.”

“Those ascetics and brahmins,” (said the Venerable Nanda),
“who say that purity [is gained] through the seen and heard,
that purity [is gained], too, by good behavior and observances,
who say purity [is gained] through numerous methods —
if, O muni, you say they have not crossed the flood,
then who in the world of devas and humans
has crossed over birth and old age, dear sir?
I ask you, Blessed One. Please answer me.”

“I do not say of all ascetics and brahmins, (Nanda,” said the Blessed One),
“that they are shrouded by birth and old age.
Those here who have abandoned the seen, the heard and sensed,
and all good behavior and observances,
who have abandoned, too, everything of numerous kinds,
who, having fully understood craving, are without influxes:
those, I say, are ‘persons who have crossed the flood.’” 

“I delight in this word of the great rishi.
Well procaimed, O Gotama, is the state without acquisitions.
Those here who have abandoned the seen, heard, and sensed,
as well as all good behavior and observances,
who have abandoned, too, everything of numerous kinds,
who, having fully understood craving, are without influxes:
I too say: ‘They have crossed the flood.’” 



The questions of Hemaka

“Those who in the past explained things to me,” (said the Venerable Hemaka),
“before [my meeting with] Gotama’s teaching,
saying, ‘Such it was, such it will be,’
all that was hearsay,
all was an increase of thought;
I did not delight in it. 

“Declare to me the Dhamma,
O muni, the destruction of craving,
having understood which, living mindfully,
one can cross over attachment to the world.”

“The dispelling of desire and lust, Hemaka,
for things here seen, heard, sensed, and cognized —
for whatever has a pleasing nature —
is the state of nibbāna, the imperishable.

“Having understood this, those mindful ones
are quenched in this very life.
And always peaceful, they have crossed over
attachment to the world.”



The questions of Todeyya

“For one in whom sensual desires do not dwell,” (said the Venerable Todeyya),
“in whom craving is not found,
and who has crossed over perplexity,
of what sort is his emancipation?”

“For one in whom sensual desires do not dwell, (Todeyya,” said the Blessed One),
“in whom craving is not found
and who has crossed over perplexity:
there is no further emancipation for him.”

“Is he without desire or does he have desire?
Does he possess wisdom or just a wise manner?
So that I can understand, O Sakka,
explain the muni to me, O universal eye.”

“He is without desire; he does not have desire.
He possesses wisdom, not just a wise manner.
Understand the muni thus, Todeyya,
as one owning nothing, unattached to sensual pleasures and existence.”



The questions of Kappa

“For those standing in the midst of the stream,” (said the Venerable Kappa),
“when a perilous flood has arisen,
for those oppressed by old age and death,
declare an island, dear sir.
Explain to me the island
so this might occur no more.”

“For those standing in the midst of the stream, (Kappa,” said the Blessed One),
“when a perilous flood has arisen,
for those oppressed by old age and death,
let me declare an island to you.

“Owning nothing, taking nothing:
this is the island with nothing further.
I call this ‘nibbāna,’
the extinction of old age and death.

“Having understood this, those mindful ones
are quenched in this very life.
They do not come under Māra’s control,
nor are they Māra’s footmen.”



The questions of Jatukaṇṇī

“Having heard of the hero who has no desire for sensual pleasures,” (said the Venerable Jatukaṇṇī),
“I have come to ask the desireless one who has escaped the flood.
Speak about the state of peace, you of innate vision.
Tell me about it, Blessed One, as it actually is.

“For the Blessed One has overcome sensual desires,
as the splendid sun overcomes the earth with its splendor.
Since I am one of limited wisdom, teach me the Dhamma,
you of broad wisdom, so that I might understand
the abandoning here of birth and old age.”

“Remove greed for sensual pleasures, (Jatukaṇṇī,” said the Blessed One),
“having seen renunciation as security.
Do not take up or reject anything:
let neither of these exist for you.

“Dry up what pertains to the past,
do not take up anything to come later.
If you will not grasp in the middle,
you will live at peace.

“For one, brahmin, entirely
devoid of greed for name-and-form,
the influxes do not exist by which
one might come under death’s control.”



The questions of Bhadrāvudha

“I entreat the home-leaver,” (said the Venerable Bhadrāvudha),
“the cutter off of craving, one without impulse,
who has abandoned delight, crossed the flood, won liberation,
abandoned mental constructs — one extremely wise:
having heard this from the nāga, they will depart from here. 

“Various peoples from [various] countries
have gathered desiring your word, O hero.
Explain matters well to them,
for this Dhamma has been understood by you.”

“One should remove all acquisitive craving, (Bhadrāvudha,” said the Blessed One),
“above, below, and across in the middle.
Whatever they cling to in the world,  by this itself Māra pursues a person.

“Therefore understanding this, a mindful bhikkhu
should not cling to anything in the entire world.
Observing, ‘They are stuck on taking up,’ [he knows]
this population is attached to the realm of death.”



The questions of Udaya

“I have come in need with a question,” (said the Venerable Udaya),
“to the seated meditator, dust-free,
who has completed the task, without influxes,
who has gone beyond all phenomena.
Speak of emancipation by final knowledge,
the breaking up of ignorance.”

“The abandoning of both, (Udaya,” said the Blessed One),
“sensual desires and dejection;
the dispelling of mental dullness,
the warding off of regrets: 

“purified by equanimity and mindfulness,
preceded by thought on the Dhamma —
I call this emancipation by final knowledge,
the breaking up of ignorance.”

“By what is the world fettered?
What is its means of traveling about?
By the abandoning of what
is ‘nibbāna’ spoken of?”

“The world is fettered by delight;
thought is its means of traveling about.
It is by the abandoning of craving
that ‘nibbāna’ is spoken of.”

“How does one live mindfully
for consciousness to cease?
Having come to ask the Blessed One,
let us hear that word of yours.”

“For one not seeking delight in feeling
internally and externally,
for one living mindfully thus,
consciousness ceases.”



The questions of Posāla

“I have come in need with a question,” (said the Venerable Posāla),
“to the one who points out the past,
who is without impulse, who has cut off doubt,
who has gone beyond all phenomena.

“I ask, Sakya, about the knowledge
of one for whom perception of form has vanished,
who has entirely abandoned the body,
who sees ‘there is nothing’
internally and externally:
how is such a one to be led?”

“Directly knowing all stations of consciousness, (Posāla,” said the Blessed One),
“the Tathāgata knows this one
remaining, who is liberated,
who has that as support.

“Having known the origin of nothingness
thus, ‘delight is the fetter,’
having directly known it in such a way,
one then sees into it with insight.
This is the real knowledge of the brahmin,
one who has lived the spiritual life.”



The questions of Mogharāja

“I have asked the Sakyan twice,” (said the Venerable Mogharāja),
“but the One with Vision did not answer me.
Yet I have heard that the divine rishi
answers upon the third request.

“As to this world, the other world,
the brahma world together with the devas,
I do not know your view,
[the view] of the famous Gotama.

“Thus I have come in need with a question
to the one of excellent vision.
How does one look upon the world,
so that the King of Death does not see one?”

“Look upon the world as empty,
Mogharāja, being ever mindful.
Having uprooted the view of self,
one may thus cross over death.
The King of Death does not see
one who looks upon the world thus.”



The questions of Piṅgiya

“I am old, weak, my color gone,” (said the Venerable Piṅgiya),
“my eyesight is not clear, my hearing is faint.
Do not let me perish confused along the way.
Declare the Dhamma that I might understand
the abandoning here of birth and old age.”

“Having seen those stricken by forms, (Piṅgiya,” said the Blessed One),
“people who are heedless, afflicted by forms,
therefore, Piṅgiya, being heedful,
abandon form for an end to renewed existence.”

“In the four directions, the four intermediate directions,
above, below: in these ten directions,
there is nothing that you have not seen, heard, and sensed,
and nothing in the world uncognized by you.
Declare the Dhamma that I might understand
the abandoning here of birth and old age.”

“Observing people fallen into craving, (Piṅgiya,” said the Blessed One),
“tormented, crushed by old age,
therefore, Piṅgiya, being heedful,
abandon craving for an end to renewed existence.”
